State of Rome from the Twelfth Century.
 Temporal Dominion of the Popes.
 Seditions of the city.
Political Heresy of Arnold of Brescia.
 Restoration of the Republic.
 The Senators.
Pride of the Romans.
Their Wars.
They Are Deprived of the Election and Presence of the Popes, Who Retire to Avignon.
The Jubilee.
Noble Families of Rome.
Feud of the Colonna and Ursini.
 State and revolutions of Rome, A.D. 1100-1500
 In the first ages of the decline and fall of the Roman empire, our eye is invariably fixed on the royal city, which had given laws to the fairest portion of the globe. We contemplate her fortunes, at first with admiration, at length with pity, always with attention, and when that attention is diverted from the capital to the provinces, they are considered as so many branches which have been successively severed from the Imperial trunk. The foundation of a second Rome, on the shores of the Bosphorus, has compelled the historian to follow the successors of Constantine; and our curiosity has been tempted to visit the most remote countries of Europe and Asia, to explore the causes and the authors of the long decay of the Byzantine monarchy. By the conquest of Justinian, we have been recalled to the banks of the Tyber, to the deliverance of the ancient metropolis; but that deliverance was a change, or perhaps an aggravation, of servitude. Rome had been already stripped of her trophies, her gods, and her Caesars; nor was the Gothic dominion more inglorious and oppressive than the tyranny of the Greeks. In the eighth century of the Christian aera, a religious quarrel, the worship of images, provoked the Romans to assert their independence: their bishop became the temporal, as well as the spiritual, father of a free people; and of the Western empire, which was restored by Charlemagne, the title and image still decorate the singular constitution of modern Germany. The name of Rome must yet command our involuntary respect: the climate (whatsoever may be its influence) was no longer the same: (1) the purity of blood had been contaminated through a thousand channels; but the venerable aspect of her ruins, and the memory of past greatness, rekindled a spark of the national character. The darkness of the middle ages exhibits some scenes not unworthy of our notice. Nor shall I dismiss the present work till I have reviewed the state and revolutions of the Roman City, which acquiesced under the absolute dominion of the popes, about the same time that Constantinople was enslaved by the Turkish arms.

 The French and German emperors of Rome, A.D. 800-1100
 In the beginning of the twelfth century, (2) the aera of the
 first crusade, Rome was revered by the Latins, as the
 metropolis of the world, as the throne of the pope and the
 emperor, who, from the eternal city, derived their title,
 their honours, and the right or exercise of temporal
 dominion. After so long an interruption, it may not be
 useless to repeat that the successors of Charlemagne and the
 Othos were chosen beyond the Rhine in a national diet; but
 that these princes were content with the humble names of
 kings of Germany and Italy, till they had passed the Alps
 and the Apennine, to seek their Imperial crown on the banks
 of the Tyber. (3) At some distance from the city, their
 approach was saluted by a long procession of the clergy and
 people with palms and crosses; and the terrific emblems of
 wolves and lions, of dragons and eagles, that floated in the
 military banners, represented the departed legions and
 cohorts of the republic. The royal path to maintain the
 liberties of Rome was thrice reiterated, at the bridge, the
 gate, and on the stairs of the Vatican; and the distribution
 of a customary donative feebly imitated the magnificence of
 the first Caesars. In the church of St. Peter, the
 coronation was performed by his successor: the voice of God
 was confounded with that of the people; and the public
 consent was declared in the acclamations of  The names of Caesar and Augustus, the
 laws of Constantine and Justinian, the example of
 Charlemagne and Otho, established the supreme dominion of
 the emperors: their title and image was engraved on the
 papal coins; (5) and their jurisdiction was marked by the
 sword of justice, which they delivered to the praefect of
 the city. But every Roman prejudice was awakened by the
 name, the language, and the manners, of a Barbarian lord.
 The Caesars of Saxony or Franconia were the chiefs of a
 feudal aristocracy; nor could they exercise the discipline
 of civil and military power, which alone secures the
 obedience of a distant people, impatient of servitude,
 though perhaps incapable of freedom. Once, and once only,
 in his life, each emperor, with an army of Teutonic vassals,
 descended from the Alps. I have described the peaceful
 order of his entry and coronation; but that order was
 commonly disturbed by the clamour and sedition of the Romans,
 who encountered their sovereign as a foreign invader: his
 departure was always speedy, and often shameful; and, in the
 absence of a long reign, his authority was insulted, and his
 name was forgotten. The progress of independence in Germany
 and Italy undermined the foundations of the Imperial
 sovereignty, and the triumph of the popes was the
 deliverance of Rome.

 Authority of the popes in Rome,
 Of her two sovereigns, the emperor had precariously reigned by the right of conquest; but the authority of the pope was founded on the soft, though more solid, basis of opinion and habit. The removal of a foreign influence restored and endeared the shepherd to his flock. Instead of the arbitrary or venal nomination of a German court, the vicar of Christ was freely chosen by the college of cardinals, most of whom were either natives or inhabitants of the city. from affection;  The applause of the magistrates and people confirmed his election, and the ecclesiastical power that was obeyed in  Sweden and Britain had been ultimately derived from the suffrage of the Romans. The same suffrage gave a prince, as well as a pontiff, to the capital. It was universally believed, that Constantine had invested the popes with the temporal dominion of Rome; and the boldest civilians, the most profane skeptics, were satisfied with disputing the right of the emperor and the validity of his gift. The truth of the fact, the authenticity of his donation, was deeply rooted in the ignorance and tradition of four centuries; and the fabulous origin was lost in the real and permanent effects. The name of Dominus or Lord was inscribed on the coin of the bishops: right;  their title was acknowledged by acclamations and oaths of allegiance, and with the free, or reluctant, consent of the German Caesars, they had long exercised a supreme or subordinate jurisdiction over the city and patrimony of St. Peter. The reign of the popes, which gratified the prejudices, was not incompatible with the liberties, of Rome; and a more critical inquiry would have revealed a still nobler source of their power; the gratitude of a nation, whom they had rescued from the heresy and oppression of the Greek tyrant. In an age of superstition, it should seem that the union of the royal and sacerdotal characters would mutually fortify each other; and that the keys of Paradise would be the surest pledge of earthly obedience. The sanctity of the office might indeed be degraded by the personal vices of the man.  virtue;  But the scandals of the tenth century were obliterated by the austere and more dangerous virtues of Gregory the Seventh and his successors; and in the ambitious contests which they maintained for the rights of the church, their
 sufferings or their success must equally tend to increase the popular veneration. They sometimes wandered in poverty and exile, the victims of persecution; and the apostolic zeal with which they offered themselves to martyrdom must engage the favour and sympathy of every Catholic breast. And
 sometimes, thundering from the Vatican, they created, judged, and deposed the kings of the world; nor could the proudest Roman be disgraced by submitting to a priest, whose feet were kissed, and whose stirrup was held, by the
 successors of Charlemagne. (6) Even the temporal interest of
 the city should have protected in peace and honour the residence of the popes; from whence a vain and lazy people derived the greatest part of their subsistence and riches. benefits;  The fixed revenue of the popes was probably impaired; many of the old patrimonial estates, both in Italy and the provinces, had been invaded by sacrilegious hands; nor could the loss be compensated by the claim, rather than the possession, of the more ample gifts of Pepin and his descendants. But the Vatican and Capitol were nourished by the incessant and increasing swarms of pilgrims and suppliants: the pale of Christianity was enlarged, and the
 pope and cardinals were overwhelmed by the judgment of ecclesiastical and secular causes. A new jurisprudence had established in the Latin church the right and practice of appeals; (7) and from the North and West the bishops and
 abbots were invited or summoned to solicit, to complain, to
 accuse, or to justify, before the threshold of the apostles.
 A rare prodigy is once recorded, that two horses, belonging
 to the archbishops of Mentz and Cologne, repassed the Alps,
 yet laden with gold and silver: (8) but it was soon
 understood, that the success, both of the pilgrims and
 clients, depended much less on the justice of their cause
 than on the value of their offering. The wealth and piety
 of these strangers were ostentatiously displayed; and their
 expenses, sacred or profane, circulated in various channels
 for the emolument of the Romans.

 Inconstancy of superstition.
 Such powerful motives should have firmly attached the
 voluntary and pious obedience of the Roman people to their
 spiritual and temporal father. But the operation of
 prejudice and interest is often disturbed by the sallies of
 ungovernable passion. The Indian who fells the tree, that he
 may gather the fruit, (9) and the Arab who plunders the
 caravans of commerce, are actuated by the same impulse of
 savage nature, which overlooks the future in the present,
 and relinquishes for momentary rapine the long and secure
 possession of the most important blessings. And it was
 thus, that the shrine of St. Peter was profaned by the
 thoughtless Romans; who pillaged the offerings, and wounded
 the pilgrims, without computing the number and value of
 similar visits, which they prevented by their inhospitable
 sacrilege. Even the influence of superstition is fluctuating
 and precarious; and the slave, whose reason is subdued, will
 often be delivered by his avarice or pride. A credulous
 devotion for the fables and oracles of the priesthood most
 powerfully acts on the mind of a Barbarian; yet such a mind
 is the least capable of preferring imagination to sense, of
 sacrificing to a distant motive, to an invisible, perhaps an
 ideal, object, the appetites and interests of the present
 world. In the vigour of health and youth, his practice will
 perpetually contradict his belief; till the pressure of age,
 or sickness, or calamity, awakens his terrors, and compels
 him to satisfy the double debt of piety and remorse. I have
 already observed, that the modern times of religious
 indifference are the most favourable to the peace and
 security of the clergy. Under the reign of superstition,
 they had much to hope from the ignorance, and much to fear
 from the violence, of mankind. The wealth, whose constant
 increase must have rendered them the sole proprietors of the
 earth, was alternately bestowed by the repentant father and
 plundered by the rapacious son: their persons were adored or
 violated; and the same idol, by the hands of the same
 votaries, was placed on the altar, or trampled in the dust.
 In the feudal system of Europe, arms were the title of
 distinction and the measure of allegiance; and amidst their
 tumult, the still voice of law and reason was seldom heard
 or obeyed. Seditions against the popes.  The turbulent Romans disdained the yoke, and insulted the impotence, of their bishop:(10) nor would his education or character allow him to exercise, with decency
 or effect, the power of the sword. The motives of his
 election and the frailties of his life were exposed to their
 familiar observation; and proximity must diminish the
 reverence which his name and his decrees impressed on a
 barbarous world. This difference has not escaped the notice
 of our philosophic historian:  Successors of Gregory VII. A.D. 1086-1305.
 Since the primitive times, the wealth of the popes was
 exposed to envy, their powers to opposition, and their
 persons to violence. But the long hostility of the mitre and
 the crown increased the numbers, and inflamed the passions,
 of their enemies. The deadly factions of the Guelphs and
 Ghibelines, so fatal to Italy, could never be embraced with
 truth or constancy by the Romans, the subjects and
 adversaries both of the bishop and emperor; but their
 support was solicited by both parties, and they alternately
 displayed in their banners the keys of St. Peter and the
 German eagle. Gregory the Seventh, who may be adored or
 detested as the founder of the papal monarchy, was driven
 from Rome, and died in exile at Salerno. Six- and-thirty of
 his successors, (12) till their retreat to Avignon,
 maintained an unequal contest with the Romans: their age and
 dignity were often violated; and the churches, in the solemn
 rites of religion, were polluted with sedition and murder.
 A repetition (13) of such capricious brutality, without
 connection or design, would be tedious and disgusting; and I
 shall content myself with some events of the twelfth
 century, which represent the state of the popes and the
 city. Paschal II. A.D. 1099-1118  On Holy Thursday, while Paschal officiated before the altar, he was interrupted by the clamours of the multitude, who imperiously demanded the confirmation of a favourite magistrate. His silence exasperated their fury; his pious
 refusal to mingle the affairs of earth and heaven was encountered with menaces, and oaths, that he should be the cause and the witness of the public ruin. During the festival of Easter, while the bishop and the clergy, barefooted and in procession, visited the tombs of the martyrs, they were twice assaulted, at the bridge of St. Angelo, and before the Capitol, with volleys of stones and darts. The houses of his adherents were levelled with the ground: Paschal escaped with difficulty and danger; he levied an army in the patrimony of St. Peter; and his last days were embittered by suffering and inflicting the calamities of civil war. Gelasius II. A.D. 1118-1119  The scenes that followed the election of his successor Gelasius the Second were still more scandalous to the church and city. Cencio Frangipani, (14) a potent and factious baron, burst into the assembly furious and in arms: the cardinals were stripped, beaten, and trampled under foot; and he seized, without pity or respect, the vicar of Christ by the throat. Gelasius was dragged by the hair along the ground, buffeted with blows, wounded with spurs, and bound with an iron chain in the house of his brutal tyrant. An insurrection of the people delivered their bishop: the rival families opposed the violence of the Frangipani; and Cencio, who sued for pardon, repented of the failure, rather than of the guilt, of his enterprise. Not many days had elapsed, when the pope was again assaulted at the altar. While his friends and enemies were engaged in a bloody contest, he escaped in his sacerdotal garments. In this unworthy flight, which excited the compassion of the Roman matrons, his attendants were
 scattered or unhorsed; and, in the fields behind the church of St. Peter, his successor was found alone and half dead with fear and fatigue. Shaking the dust from his feet, the apostle withdrew from a city in which his dignity was
 insulted and his person was endangered; and the vanity of sacerdotal ambition is revealed in the involuntary confession, that one emperor was more tolerable than twenty. (15) These examples might suffice; but I cannot forget the sufferings of two pontiffs of the same age, the second and third of the name of Lucius. Lucius II. A.D. 1144,1145.  The former, as he ascended in battle array to assault the Capitol, was struck on the temple by a stone, and expired in a few days. Lucius III. A.D. 1181-1185.  The latter was severely wounded in the person of his servants. In a civil commotion, several of his priests had been made prisoners; and the inhuman Romans, reserving one as a guide for his brethren, put out their eyes, crowned them with ludicrous mitres, mounted them on asses with their faces towards the tail, and extorted an oath, that, in this wretched condition, they should offer themselves as a lesson to the head of the church. Hope or fear, lassitude or remorse, the characters of the men, and the circumstances of the times, might sometimes obtain an interval of peace and obedience; and the pope was restored with joyful acclamations to the Lateran or Vatican, from whence he had been driven with threats and violence. But the root of mischief was deep and perennial; and a momentary calm was preceded and followed by such tempests as had almost sunk the bark of St. Peter. Rome continually presented the aspect of war and discord: the churches and palaces were fortified and assaulted by the factions and families; Calistus II. A.D. 1119-1124.  and, after giving peace to Europe, Calistus the Second alone had resolution and power to prohibit the use of private arms in the metropolis. Among the nations who revered the apostolic throne, the tumults of Rome provoked a general indignation; Innocent II. A.D. 1130-1143.  and in a letter to his disciple Eugenius the Third, St. Bernard, with the sharpness of his wit and zeal, has stigmatized the vices of the rebellious people. (16) Character of the Romans by St. Bernard. Surely this dark portrait is not coloured by the pencil of Christian charity; (17) yet the features, however harsh or ugly, express a lively resemblance of the Roman of the twelfth century. (18)
 Political heresy of Arnold of Brescia, A.D. 1140.
 The Jews had rejected the Christ when he appeared among them
 in a plebeian character; and the Romans might plead their
 ignorance of his vicar when he assumed the pomp and pride of
 a temporal sovereign. In the busy age of the crusades, some
 sparks of curiosity and reason were rekindled in the Western
 world: the heresy of Bulgaria, the Paulician sect, was
 successfully transplanted into the soil of Italy and France;
 the Gnostic visions were mingled with the simplicity of the
 gospel; and the enemies of the clergy reconciled their
 passions with their conscience, the desire of freedom with
 the profession of piety. (19) The trumpet of Roman liberty
 was first sounded by Arnold of Brescia, (20) whose promotion
 in the church was confined to the lowest rank, and who wore
 the monastic habit rather as a garb of poverty than as a
 uniform of obedience. His adversaries could not deny the
 wit and eloquence which they severely felt; they confess
 with reluctance the specious purity of his morals; and his
 errors were recommended to the public by a mixture of
 important and beneficial truths. In his theological
 studies, he had been the disciple of the famous and
 unfortunate Abelard, (21) who was likewise involved in the
 suspicion of heresy: but the lover of Eloisa was of a soft
 and flexible nature; and his ecclesiastic judges were
 edified and disarmed by the humility of his repentance.
 From this master, Arnold most probably imbibed some
 metaphysical definitions of the Trinity, repugnant to the
 taste of the times: his ideas of baptism and the eucharist
 are loosely censured; but a political heresy was the source
 of his fame and misfortunes. He presumed to quote the
 declaration of Christ, that his kingdom is not of this
 world: he boldly maintained, that the sword and the sceptre
 were intrusted to the civil magistrate; that temporal honours
 and possessions were lawfully vested in secular persons;
 that the abbots, the bishops, and the pope himself, must
 renounce either their state or their salvation; and that
 after the loss of their revenues, the voluntary tithes and
 oblations of the faithful would suffice, not indeed for
 luxury and avarice, but for a frugal life in the exercise of
 spiritual labours. During a short time, the preacher was
 revered as a patriot; and the discontent, or revolt, of
 Brescia against her bishop, was the first fruits of his
 dangerous lessons. But the favour of the people is less
 permanent than the resentment of the priest; and after the
 heresy of Arnold had been condemned by Innocent the Second,
 (22) in the general council of the Lateran, the magistrates
 themselves were urged by prejudice and fear to execute the
 sentence of the church. Italy could no longer afford a
 refuge; and the disciple of Abelard escaped beyond the Alps,
 till he found a safe and hospitable shelter in Zurich, now
 the first of the Swiss cantons. From a Roman station, (23) a
 royal villa, a chapter of noble virgins, Zurich had
 gradually increased to a free and flourishing city; where
 the appeals of the Milanese were sometimes tried by the
 Imperial commissaries. (24) In an age less ripe for
 reformation, the precursor of Zuinglius was heard with
 applause: a brave and simple people imbibed, and long
 retained, the colour of his opinions; and his art, or merit,
 seduced the bishop of Constance, and even the pope's legate,
 who forgot, for his sake, the interest of their master and
 their order. Their tardy zeal was quickened by the fierce
 exhortations of St. Bernard; (25) and the enemy of the church
 was driven by persecution to the desperate measures of
 erecting his standard in Rome itself, in the face of the
 successor of St. Peter.

 He exhorts the romans to restore the republic. A.D. 1144-1154. 
 Yet the courage of Arnold was not devoid of discretion: he
 was protected, and had perhaps been invited, by the nobles
 and people; and in the service of freedom, his eloquence
 thundered over the seven hills. Blending in the same
 discourse the texts of Livy and St. Paul, uniting the
 motives of gospel, and of classic, enthusiasm, he admonished
 the Romans, how strangely their patience and the vices of
 the clergy had degenerated from the primitive times of the
 church and the city. He exhorted them to assert the
 inalienable rights of men and Christians; to restore the
 laws and magistrates of the republic; to respect the name of
 the emperor; but to confine their shepherd to the spiritual
 government of his flock. (26) Nor could his spiritual government escape the censure and control of the reformer; and the inferior clergy were taught by his lessons to resist
 the cardinals, who had usurped a despotic command over the
 twenty-eight regions or parishes of Rome. (27) The revolution
 was not accomplished without rapine and violence, the
 diffusion of blood and the demolition of houses: the
 victorious faction was enriched with the spoils of the
 clergy and the adverse nobles. Arnold of Brescia enjoyed, or
 deplored, the effects of his mission: his reign continued
 above ten years, while two popes, Innocent the Second and
 Anastasius the Fourth, either trembled in the Vatican, or
 wandered as exiles in the adjacent cities. They were
 succeeded by a more vigorous and fortunate pontiff. Adrian
 the Fourth, (28) the only Englishman who has ascended the throne of St. Peter; and whose merit emerged from the mean condition of a monk, and almost a beggar, in the monastery
 of St. Albans. On the first provocation, of a cardinal
 killed or wounded in the streets, he cast an interdict on
 the guilty people; and from Christmas to Easter, Rome was
 deprived of the real or imaginary comforts of religious
 worship. The Romans had despised their temporal prince:
 they submitted with grief and terror to the censures of
 their spiritual father: their guilt was expiated by penance,
 and the banishment of the seditious preacher was the price
 of their absolution. But the revenge of Adrian was yet
 unsatisfied, and the approaching coronation of Frederic
 Barbarossa was fatal to the bold reformer, who had offended,
 though not in an equal degree, the heads of the church and
 state. In their interview at Viterbo, the pope represented
 to the emperor the furious, ungovernable spirit of the
 Romans; the insults, the injuries, the fears, to which his
 person and his clergy were continually exposed; and the
 pernicious tendency of the heresy of Arnold, which must
 subvert the principles of civil, as well as ecclesiastical,
 subordination. Frederic was convinced by these arguments, or tempted by the desire of the Imperial crown: in the balance of ambition, the innocence or life of an individual is of small account; and their common enemy was sacrificed to a moment of political concord. After his retreat from Rome,
 Arnold had been protected by the viscounts of Campania, from whom he was extorted by the power of Caesar: the praefect of the city pronounced his sentence: His execution, A.D. 1155.  the martyr of freedom was burned alive in the presence of a careless and ungrateful  people; and his ashes were cast into the Tyber, lest the heretics should collect and worship the relics of their master. (29) The clergy triumphed in his death: with his  ashes, his sect was dispersed; his memory still lived in the minds of the Romans. From his school they had probably derived a new article of faith, that the metropolis of the Catholic church is exempt from the penalties of excommunication and interdict. Their bishops might argue, that the supreme jurisdiction, which they exercised over kings and nations, more especially embraced the city and diocese of the prince of the apostles. But they preached to the winds, and the same principle that weakened the effect, must temper the abuse, of the thunders of the Vatican.

 Restoration of the senate, A.D. 1144.
 The love of ancient freedom has encouraged a belief that as early as the tenth century, in their first struggles against the Saxon Othos, the commonwealth was vindicated and restored by the senate and people of Rome; that two consuls were annually elected among the nobles, and that ten or
 twelve plebeian magistrates revived the name and office of the tribunes of the commons. (30) But this venerable structure disappears before the light of criticism. In the darkness of the middle ages, the appellations of senators, of consuls, of the sons of consuls, may sometimes be discovered. (31) They were bestowed by the emperors, or
 assumed by the most powerful citizens, to denote their rank,
 their honours, (32) and perhaps the claim of a pure and
 patrician descent: but they float on the surface, without a
 series or a substance, the titles of men, not the orders of
 government; (33) and it is only from the year of Christ one
 thousand one hundred and forty-four that the establishment
 of the senate is dated, as a glorious aera, in the acts of
 the city. A new constitution was hastily framed by private
 ambition or popular enthusiasm; nor could Rome, in the
 twelfth century, produce an antiquary to explain, or a
 legislator to restore, the harmony and proportions of the
 ancient model. The assembly of a free, of an armed, people,
 will ever speak in loud and weighty acclamations. But the
 regular distribution of the thirty-five tribes, the nice
 balance of the wealth and numbers of the centuries, the
 debates of the adverse orators, and the slow operations of
 votes and ballots, could not easily be adapted by a blind
 multitude, ignorant of the arts, and insensible of the
 benefits, of legal government. It was proposed by Arnold to
 revive and discriminate the equestrian order; but what could
 be the motive or measure of such distinction? (34) The
 pecuniary qualification of the knights must have been
 reduced to the poverty of the times: those times no longer
 required their civil functions of judges and farmers of the
 revenue; and their primitive duty, their military service on
 horseback, was more nobly supplied by feudal tenures and the
 spirit of chivalry. The jurisprudence of the republic was
 useless and unknown: the nations and families of Italy who
 lived under the Roman and Barbaric laws were insensibly
 mingled in a common mass; and some faint tradition, some
 imperfect fragments, preserved the memory of the Code and
 Pandects of Justinian. With their liberty the Romans might
 doubtless have restored the appellation and office of
 consuls; had they not disdained a title so promiscuously
 adopted in the Italian cities, that it has finally settled
 on the humble station of the agents of commerce in a foreign
 land. But the rights of the tribunes, the formidable word
 that arrested the public counsels, suppose or must produce a
 legitimate democracy. The old patricians were the subjects,
 the modern barons the tyrants, of the state; nor would the
 enemies of peace and order, who insulted the vicar of
 Christ, have long respected the unarmed sanctity of a
 plebeian magistrate. (35)
 The Capitol.
 In the revolution of the twelfth century, which gave a new existence and aera to Rome, we may observe the real and important events that marked or confirmed her political independence. I. The Capitoline hill, one of her seven eminences, (36) is about four hundred yards in length, and two hundred in breadth. A flight of a hundred steps led to the summit of the Tarpeian rock; and far steeper was the ascent before the declivities had been smoothed and the precipices filled by the ruins of fallen edifices. From the earliest ages, the Capitol had been used as a temple in peace, a fortress in war: after the loss of the city, it maintained a siege against the victorious Gauls, and the sanctuary of the empire was occupied, assaulted, and burnt, in the civil wars of Vitellius and Vespasian. (37) The temples of Jupiter and his kindred deities had crumbled into dust; their place was supplied by monasteries and houses; and the solid walls, the long and shelving porticos, were decayed or ruined by the lapse of time. It was the first act of the Romans, an act of freedom, to restore the strength, though not the beauty, of the Capitol; to fortify the seat of their arms and counsels; and as often as they ascended the hill, the coldest minds must have glowed with the remembrance of their ancestors. The coin. II. The first Caesars had been invested with the exclusive coinage of the gold and silver; to the senate they abandoned the baser metal of bronze or copper: (38) the emblems and legends were inscribed on a more ample field by the genius of flattery; and the prince was relieved from the care of celebrating his own virtues. The successors of Diocletian despised even the flattery of the senate: their royal officers at Rome, and in the provinces, assumed the sole direction of the mint; and the same prerogative was inherited by the Gothic kings of Italy, and the long series of the Greek, the French, and the German dynasties. After an abdication of eight hundred years, the Roman senate asserted this honourable and lucrative privilege; which was tacitly renounced by the popes, from Paschal the Second to the establishment of their residence beyond the Alps. Some of these republican coins of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries are shown in the cabinets of the curious. On one of these, a gold medal, Christ is depictured holding in his left hand a book with this inscription: "THE VOW OF THE ROMAN SENATE AND PEOPLE: ROME THE CAPITAL OF THE WORLD;" on the reverse, St. Peter
 delivering a banner to a kneeling senator in his cap and
 gown, with the name and arms of his family impressed on a
 shield. (39) The praefect of the city. III. With the empire, the praefect of the city
 had declined to a municipal officer; yet he still exercised
 in the last appeal the civil and criminal jurisdiction; and
 a drawn sword, which he received from the successors of
 Otho, was the mode of his investiture and the emblem of his
 functions. (40) The dignity was confined to the noble families of Rome: the choice of the people was ratified by the pope; but a triple oath of fidelity must have often
 embarrassed the praefect in the conflict of adverse duties.
 (41) A servant, in whom they possessed but a third share, was
 dismissed by the independent Romans: in his place they
 elected a patrician; but this title, which Charlemagne had
 not disdained, was too lofty for a citizen or a subject; A.D. 1198-1216. and, after the first fervour of rebellion, they consented without reluctance to the restoration of the praefect.
 About fifty years after this event, Innocent the Third, the
 most ambitious, or at least the most fortunate, of the
 Pontiffs, delivered the Romans and himself from this badge
 of foreign dominion: he invested the praefect with a banner
 instead of a sword, and absolved him from all dependence of
 oaths or service to the German emperors. (42) In his place an
 ecclesiastic, a present or future cardinal, was named by the
 pope to the civil government of Rome; but his jurisdiction
 has been reduced to a narrow compass; and in the days of
 freedom, the right or exercise was derived from the senate
 and people. Number and choice of the senate. IV. After the revival of the senate, (43) the
 conscript fathers (if I may use the expression) were
 invested with the legislative and executive power; but their
 views seldom reached beyond the present day; and that day
 was most frequently disturbed by violence and tumult. In
 its utmost plenitude, the order or assembly consisted of
 fifty-six senators, (44) the most eminent of whom were distinguished by the title of counsellors: they were nominated, perhaps annually, by the people; and a previous
 choice of their electors, ten persons in each region, or
 parish, might afford a basis for a free and permanent
 constitution. The popes, who in this tempest submitted
 rather to bend than to break, confirmed by treaty the
 establishment and privileges of the senate, and expected
 from time, peace, and religion, the restoration of their government. The motives of public and private interest might sometimes draw from the Romans an occasional and temporary sacrifice of their claims; and they renewed their oath of allegiance to the successor of St. Peter and Constantine, the lawful head of the church and the republic. (45)
 The office of senator.
 The union and vigour of a public council was dissolved in a
 lawless city; and the Romans soon adopted a more strong and
 simple mode of administration. They condensed the name and
 authority of the senate in a single magistrate, or two
 colleagues; and as they were changed at the end of a year,
 or of six months, the greatness of the trust was compensated
 by the shortness of the term. But in this transient reign,
 the senators of Rome indulged their avarice and ambition:
 their justice was perverted by the interest of their family
 and faction; and as they punished only their enemies, they
 were obeyed only by their adherents. Anarchy, no longer
 tempered by the pastoral care of their bishop, admonished
 the Romans that they were incapable of governing themselves;
 and they sought abroad those blessings which they were
 hopeless of finding at home. In the same age, and from the
 same motives, most of the Italian republics were prompted to
 embrace a measure, which, however strange it may seem, was
 adapted to their situation, and productive of the most
 salutary effects. (46) They chose, in some foreign but
 friendly city, an impartial magistrate of noble birth and
 unblemished character, a soldier and a statesman,
 recommended by the voice of fame and his country, to whom
 they delegated for a time the supreme administration of
 peace and war. The compact between the governor and the
 governed was sealed with oaths and subscriptions; and the
 duration of his power, the measure of his stipend, the
 nature of their mutual obligations, were defined with
 scrupulous precision. They swore to obey him as their lawful
 superior: he pledged his faith to unite the indifference of
 a stranger with the zeal of a patriot. At his choice, four
 or six knights and civilians, his assessors in arms and
 justice, attended the Podesta, (47) who maintained at his own
 expense a decent retinue of servants and horses: his wife,
 his son, his brother, who might bias the affections of the
 judge, were left behind: during the exercise of his office
 he was not permitted to purchase land, to contract an
 alliance, or even to accept an invitation in the house of a
 citizen; nor could he honourably depart till he had satisfied
 the complaints that might be urged against his government.

 Brancaleone, A.D. 1252-1258.
It was thus, about the middle of the thirteenth century,
 that the Romans called from Bologna the senator Brancaleone,
 (48) whose fame and merit have been rescued from oblivion by
 the pen of an English historian. A just anxiety for his
 reputation, a clear foresight of the difficulties of the
 task, had engaged him to refuse the honour of their choice:
 the statutes of Rome were suspended, and his office
 prolonged to the term of three years. By the guilty and
 licentious he was accused as cruel; by the clergy he was
 suspected as partial; but the friends of peace and order
 applauded the firm and upright magistrate by whom those
 blessings were restored. No criminals were so powerful as
 to brave, so obscure as to elude, the justice of the
 senator. By his sentence two nobles of the Annibaldi family
 were executed on a gibbet; and he inexorably demolished, in
 the city and neighbourhood, one hundred and forty towers, the
 strong shelters of rapine and mischief. The bishop, as a
 simple bishop, was compelled to reside in his diocese; and
 the standard of Brancaleone was displayed in the field with
 terror and effect. His services were repaid by the
 ingratitude of a people unworthy of the happiness which they
 enjoyed. By the public robbers, whom he had provoked for
 their sake, the Romans were excited to depose and imprison
 their benefactor; nor would his life have been spared, if
 Bologna had not possessed a pledge for his safety. Before
 his departure, the prudent senator had required the exchange of thirty hostages of the noblest families of Rome: on the news of his danger, and at the prayer of his wife, they were more strictly guarded; and Bologna, in the cause of honour, sustained the thunders of a papal interdict. This generous resistance allowed the Romans to compare the present with the past; and Brancaleone was conducted from the prison to the Capitol amidst the acclamations of a repentant people. The remainder of his government was firm and fortunate; and as soon as envy was appeased by death, his head, enclosed in a precious vase, was deposited on a lofty column of marble. (49)
 Charles of Anjou, A.D. 1265-1278.
 The impotence of reason and virtue recommended in Italy a
 more effectual choice: instead of a private citizen, to whom
 they yielded a voluntary and precarious obedience, the
 Romans elected for their senator some prince of independent
 power, who could defend them from their enemies and
 themselves. Charles of Anjou and Provence, the most
 ambitious and warlike monarch of the age, accepted at the
 same time the kingdom of Naples from the pope, and the
 office of senator from the Roman people. (50) As he passed
 through the city, in his road to victory, he received their
 oath of allegiance, lodged in the Lateran palace, and
 smoothed in a short visit the harsh features of his despotic
 character. Yet even Charles was exposed to the inconstancy
 of the people, who saluted with the same acclamations the
 passage of his rival, the unfortunate Conradin; and a
 powerful avenger, who reigned in the Capitol, alarmed the
 fears and jealousy of the popes. The absolute term of his
 life was superseded by a renewal every third year; and the
 enmity of Nicholas the Third obliged the Sicilian king to
 abdicate the government of Rome. In his bull, a perpetual
 law, the imperious pontiff asserts the truth, validity, and use of the donation of Constantine, not less essential to the peace of the city than to the independence of the church; establishes the annual election of the senator; and formally disqualifies all emperors, kings, princes, and persons of an eminent and conspicuous rank. (51) Pope Martin IV. A.D. 1281.  This prohibitory clause was repealed in his own behalf by Martin the Fourth, who humbly solicited the suffrage of the Romans.
 In the presence, and by the authority, of the people, two electors conferred, not on the pope, but on the noble and faithful Martin, the dignity of senator, and the supreme administration of the republic, (52) to hold during his natural life, and to exercise at pleasure by himself or his deputies. The emperor Lewis of Bavaria, A.D. 1328.  About fifty years afterwards, the same title was granted to the emperor Lewis of Bavaria; and the liberty of Rome was acknowledged by her two sovereigns, who accepted a municipal office in the government of their own metropolis.

 Addresses of Rome to the emperors.
In the first moments of rebellion, when Arnold of Brescia had inflamed their minds against the church, the Romans artfully labored to conciliate the favour of the empire, and to recommend their merit and services in the cause of Caesar. Conrad III. A.D. 1144.  The style of their ambassadors to Conrad the Third  and Frederic the First is a mixture of flattery and pride, the tradition and the ignorance of their own history. (53)  After some complaint of his silence and neglect, they exhort the former of these princes to pass the Alps, and assume from their hands the Imperial crown.  But these splendid and fallacious wishes were not cherished by Conrad the Franconian, whose eyes were fixed on the Holy Land, and who died without visiting Rome soon after his return from the Holy Land.

 Frederic I. A.D. 1155.
 His nephew and successor, Frederic Barbarossa, was more ambitious of the Imperial crown; nor had any of the successors of Otho acquired such absolute sway over the kingdom of Italy. Surrounded by his ecclesiastical and secular princes, he gave audience in his camp at Sutri to the ambassadors of Rome, who thus addressed him in a free and florid oration:  The flowers of Latin rhetoric were not yet exhausted; but Frederic, impatient of their vanity, interrupted the orators in the high tone of royalty and conquest.  Neither the emperor nor the senate could maintain these lofty pretensions of
 dominion and liberty. United with the pope, and suspicious
 of the Romans, Frederic continued his march to the Vatican;
 his coronation was disturbed by a sally from the Capitol;
 and if the numbers and valour of the Germans prevailed in the
 bloody conflict, he could not safely encamp in the presence
 of a city of which he styled himself the sovereign. About
 twelve years afterwards, he besieged Rome, to seat an
 antipope in the chair of St. Peter; and twelve Pisan galleys
 were introduced into the Tyber: but the senate and people
 were saved by the arts of negotiation and the progress of
 disease; nor did Frederic or his successors reiterate the
 hostile attempt. Their laborious reigns were exercised by
 the popes, the crusades, and the independence of Lombardy
 and Germany: they courted the alliance of the Romans; and
 Frederic the Second offered in the Capitol the great
 standard, the Caroccio of Milan. (60) After the extinction of
 the house of Swabia, they were banished beyond the Alps: and
 their last coronations betrayed the impotence and poverty of
 the Teutonic Caesars. (61)
 Wars of the Romans against the neighbouring cities.
 Under the reign of Adrian, when the empire extended from the
 Euphrates to the ocean, from Mount Atlas to the Grampian
 hills, a fanciful historian (62) amused the Romans with the picture of their ancient wars.   The pride of his contemporaries was gratified by the contrast of the past and the present: they would have been humbled by the prospect of futurity; by the prediction, that after a thousand years, Rome, despoiled of empire, and contracted to her primaeval limits, would renew the same hostilities, on the same ground which was then decorated with her villas and gardens. The adjacent territory on either side of the Tiber was always claimed, and sometimes possessed, as the patrimony of St. Peter; but the barons assumed a lawless independence, and the cities too faithfully copied the revolt and discord of
 the metropolis. In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries the
 Romans incessantly laboured to reduce or destroy the
 contumacious vassals of the church and senate; and if their
 headstrong and selfish ambition was moderated by the pope,
 he often encouraged their zeal by the alliance of his
 spiritual arms. Their warfare was that of the first consuls
 and dictators, who were taken from the plough. The
 assembled in arms at the foot of the Capitol; sallied from
 the gates, plundered or burnt the harvests of their
 neighbours, engaged in tumultuary conflict, and returned home
 after an expedition of fifteen or twenty days. Their sieges
 were tedious and unskilful: in the use of victory, they
 indulged the meaner passions of jealousy and revenge; and
 instead of adopting the valour, they trampled on the
 misfortunes, of their adversaries. The captives, in their
 shirts, with a rope round their necks, solicited their
 pardon: the fortifications, and even the buildings, of the
 rival cities, were demolished, and the inhabitants were
 scattered in the adjacent villages. It was thus that the
 seats of the cardinal bishops, Porto, Ostia, Albanum,
 Tusculum, Praeneste, and Tibur or Tivoli, were successively
 overthrown by the ferocious hostility of the Romans. (63) Of
 these, (64) Porto and Ostia, the two keys of the Tyber, are still vacant and desolate: the marshy and unwholesome banks are peopled with herds of buffaloes, and the river is lost to every purpose of navigation and trade. The hills, which afford a shady retirement from the autumnal heats, have again smiled with the blessings of peace; Frescati has arisen near the ruins of Tusculum; Tibur or Tivoli has resumed the honours of a city, (65) and the meaner towns of Albano and Palestrina are decorated with the villas of the cardinals and princes of Rome. In the work of destruction, the ambition of the Romans was often checked and repulsed by the neighbouring cities and their allies: in the first siege of Tibur, they were driven from their camp; Battle of Tusculum, A.D. 1167.  and the battles of Tusculum (66) and Viterbo (67) might be compared in their relative state to the memorable fields of Thrasymene and Cannae. In the first of these petty wars, thirty thousand Romans were overthrown by a thousand German horse, whom Frederic Barbarossa had detached to the relief of Tusculum: and if we number the slain at three, the prisoners at two, thousand, we shall embrace the most authentic and moderate account. Battle of Viterbo, A.D. 1234.  Sixty-eight years afterwards they marched against Viterbo in the ecclesiastical state with the whole force of the city; by a rare coalition the Teutonic eagle was blended, in the adverse banners, with the keys of St. Peter;  and the pope's auxiliaries were commanded by a count of
 Thoulouse and a bishop of Winchester. The Romans were discomfited with shame and slaughter: but the English prelate must have indulged the vanity of a pilgrim, if he multiplied their numbers to one hundred, and their loss in
 the field to thirty, thousand men. Had the policy of the senate and the discipline of the legions been restored with the Capitol, the divided condition of Italy would have offered the fairest opportunity of a second conquest. But
 in arms, the modern Romans were not above, and in arts, they were far below, the common level of the neighbouring republics. Nor was their warlike spirit of any long continuance; after some irregular sallies, they subsided in the national apathy, in the neglect of military institutions, and in the disgraceful and dangerous use of foreign mercenaries.

 The election of the popes.
 Ambition is a weed of quick and early vegetation in the
 vineyard of Christ. Under the first Christian princes, the
 chair of St. Peter was disputed by the votes, the venality,
 the violence, of a popular election: the sanctuaries of Rome
 were polluted with blood; and, from the third to the twelfth
 century, the church was distracted by the mischief of
 frequent schisms. As long as the final appeal was determined
 by the civil magistrate, these mischiefs were transient and
 local: the merits were tried by equity or favour; nor could
 the unsuccessful competitor long disturb the triumph of his
 rival. But after the emperors had been divested of their
 prerogatives, after a maxim had been established that the
 vicar of Christ is amenable to no earthly tribunal, each
 vacancy of the holy see might involve Christendom in
 controversy and war. The claims of the cardinals and
 inferior clergy, of the nobles and people, were vague and
 litigious: the freedom of choice was overruled by the
 tumults of a city that no longer owned or obeyed a superior.
 On the decease of a pope, two factions proceeded in
 different churches to a double election: the number and
 weight of votes, the priority of time, the merit of the
 candidates, might balance each other: the most respectable
 of the clergy were divided; and the distant princes, who
 bowed before the spiritual throne, could not distinguish the
 spurious, from the legitimate, idol. The emperors were
 often the authors of the schism, from the political motive
 of opposing a friendly to a hostile pontiff; and each of the
 competitors was reduced to suffer the insults of his
 enemies, who were not awed by conscience, and to purchase
 the support of his adherents, who were instigated by avarice
 or ambition. Right of the cardinals established by Alexander III. A.D. 1179.  A peaceful and perpetual succession was
 ascertained by Alexander the Third, (68) who finally abolished the tumultuary votes of the clergy and people, and defined the right of election in the sole college of cardinals. (69) The three orders of bishops, priests, and  deacons, were assimilated to each other by this important privilege; the parochial clergy of Rome obtained the first rank in the hierarchy: they were indifferently chosen among the nations of Christendom; and the possession of the richest benefices, of the most important bishoprics, was not incompatible with their title and office. The senators of the Catholic church, the coadjutors and legates of the supreme pontiff, were robed in purple, the symbol of martyrdom or royalty; they claimed a proud equality with kings; and their dignity was enhanced by the smallness of their number, which, till the reign of Leo the Tenth, seldom exceeded twenty or twenty-five persons. By this wise regulation, all doubt and scandal were removed, and the root of schism was so effectually destroyed, that in a period of six hundred years a double choice has only once divided the unity of the sacred college. But as the concurrence of two thirds of the votes had been made necessary, the election was often delayed by the private interest and passions of the cardinals; and while they prolonged their independent reign, the Christian world was left destitute of a head. Institution of the conclave established by Gregory X. A.D. 1274.  A vacancy of almost three years had preceded the elevation of George the Tenth, who resolved to prevent the future abuse;
 and his bull, after some opposition, has been consecrated in the code of the canon law. (70) Nine days are allowed for the obsequies of the deceased pope, and the arrival of the  absent cardinals; on the tenth, they are imprisoned, each with one domestic, in a common apartment or conclave, without any separation of walls or curtains: a small window is reserved for the introduction of necessaries; but the door is locked on both sides and guarded by the magistrates of the city, to seclude them from all correspondence with the world. If the election be not consummated in three days, the luxury of their table is contracted to a single
 dish at dinner and supper; and after the eighth day, they are reduced to a scanty allowance of bread, water, and wine. During the vacancy of the holy see, the cardinals are prohibited from touching the revenues, or assuming, unless
 in some rare emergency, the government of the church: all  agreements and promises among the electors are formally annulled; and their integrity is fortified by their solemn oath and the prayers of the Catholics. Some articles of inconvenient or superfluous rigour have been gradually relaxed, but the principle of confinement is vigorous and entire: they are still urged, by the personal motives of health and freedom, to accelerate the moment of their
 deliverance; and the improvement of ballot or secret votes has wrapped the struggles of the conclave (71) in the silky veil of charity and politeness. (72) By these institutions the Romans were excluded from the election of their prince
 and bishop; and in the fever of wild and precarious liberty, they seemed insensible of the loss of this inestimable privilege. A.D. 1328. The emperor Lewis of Bavaria revived the example of the great Otho. After some negotiation with the magistrates, the Roman people were assembled (73) in the square before St. Peter's: the pope of Avignon, John the Twenty-second, was deposed: the choice of his successor was ratified by their consent and applause. They freely voted for a new law, that their bishop should never be absent more than three months in the year, and two days' journey from the city; and that if he neglected to return on the third summons, the public servant should be degraded and  dismissed. (74) But Lewis forgot his own debility and the prejudices of the times: beyond the precincts of a German camp, his useless phantom was rejected; the Romans despised their own workmanship; the antipope implored the mercy of his lawful sovereign; (75) and the exclusive right of the
 cardinals was more firmly established by this unseasonable attack.

 Absence of the popes from Rome.
 Had the election been always held in the Vatican, the rights
 of the senate and people would not have been violated with
 impunity. But the Romans forgot, and were forgotten. in the
 absence of the successors of Gregory the Seventh, who did
 not keep as a divine precept their ordinary residence in the
 city and diocese. The care of that diocese was less
 important than the government of the universal church; nor
 could the popes delight in a city in which their authority
 was always opposed, and their person was often endangered.
 From the persecution of the emperors, and the wars of Italy,
 they escaped beyond the Alps into the hospitable bosom of
 France; from the tumults of Rome they prudently withdrew to
 live and die in the more tranquil stations of Anagni,
 Perugia, Viterbo, and the adjacent cities. When the flock
 was offended or impoverished by the absence of the shepherd,
 they were recalled by a stern admonition, that St. Peter had
 fixed his chair, not in an obscure village, but in the
 capital of the world; by a ferocious menace, that the Romans
 would march in arms to destroy the place and people that
 should dare to afford them a retreat. They returned with
 timorous obedience; and were saluted with the account of a
 heavy debt, of all the losses which their desertion had
 occasioned, the hire of lodgings, the sale of provisions,
 and the various expenses of servants and strangers who
 attended the court. (76) After a short interval of peace, and
 perhaps of authority, they were again banished by new
 tumults, and again summoned by the imperious or respectful
 invitation of the senate. In these occasional retreats, the
 exiles and fugitives of the Vatican were seldom long, or
 far, distant from the metropolis; but in the beginning of
 the fourteenth century, the apostolic throne was
 transported, as it might seem forever, from the Tyber to the
 Rhne Boniface VIII. A.D. 1294-1303.  and the cause of the transmigration may be deduced from the furious contest between Boniface the Eighth and the king of France. (77) The spiritual arms of excommunication and interdict were repulsed by the union of the three
 estates, and the privileges of the Gallican church; but the pope was not prepared against the carnal weapons which Philip the Fair had courage to employ. As the pope resided at Anagni, without the suspicion of danger, his palace and
 person were assaulted by three hundred horse, who had been secretly levied by William of Nogaret, a French minister, and Sciarra Colonna, of a noble but hostile family of Rome. The cardinals fled; the inhabitants of Anagni were seduced from their allegiance and gratitude; but the dauntless Boniface, unarmed and alone, seated himself in his chair, and awaited, like the conscript fathers of old, the swords of the Gauls. Nogaret, a foreign adversary, was content to
 execute the orders of his master: by the domestic enmity of Colonna, he was insulted with words and blows; and during a confinement of three days his life was threatened by the hardships which they inflicted on the obstinacy which they
 provoked. Their strange delay gave time and courage to the adherents of the church, who rescued him from sacrilegious violence; but his imperious soul was wounded in the vital part; and Boniface expired at Rome in a frenzy of rage and
 revenge. His memory is stained with the glaring vices of avarice and pride; nor has the courage of a martyr promoted this ecclesiastical champion to the honours of a saint; a magnanimous sinner, (say the chronicles of the times,) who entered like a fox, reigned like a lion, and died like a dog. He was succeeded by Benedict the Eleventh, the mildest of mankind. Yet he excommunicated the impious emissaries of Philip, and devoted the city and people of Anagni by a tremendous curse, whose effects are still visible to the eyes of superstition. (78)
 Translation of the holy see to Avignon, A.D. 1309.
 After his decease, the tedious and equal suspense of the
 conclave was fixed by the dexterity of the French faction.
 A specious offer was made and accepted, that, in the term of
 forty days, they would elect one of the three candidates who
 should be named by their opponents. The archbishop of
 Bourdeaux, a furious enemy of his king and country, was the
 first on the list; but his ambition was known; and his
 conscience obeyed the calls of fortune and the commands of a
 benefactor, who had been informed by a swift messenger that
 the choice of a pope was now in his hands. The terms were
 regulated in a private interview; and with such speed and
 secrecy was the business transacted, that the unanimous
 conclave applauded the elevation of Clement the Fifth. (79)
 The cardinals of both parties were soon astonished by a
 summons to attend him beyond the Alps; from whence, as they
 soon discovered, they must never hope to return. He was
 engaged, by promise and affection, to prefer the residence
 of France; and, after dragging his court through Poitou and
 Gascony, and devouring, by his expense, the cities and
 convents on the road, he finally reposed at Avignon, (80)
 which flourished above seventy years (81) the seat of the
 Roman pontiff and the metropolis of Christendom. By land,
 by sea, by the Rhone, the position of Avignon was on all
 sides accessible; the southern provinces of France do not
 yield to Italy itself; new palaces arose for the
 accommodation of the pope and cardinals; and the arts of
 luxury were soon attracted by the treasures of the church.
 They were already possessed of the adjacent territory, the
 Venaissin county, (82) a populous and fertile spot; and the
 sovereignty of Avignon was afterwards purchased from the
 youth and distress of Jane, the first queen of Naples and
 countess of Provence, for the inadequate price of fourscore
 thousand florins. (83) Under the shadow of a French monarchy,
 amidst an obedient people, the popes enjoyed an honourable
 and tranquil state, to which they long had been strangers:
 but Italy deplored their absence; and Rome, in solitude and
 poverty, might repent of the ungovernable freedom which had
 driven from the Vatican the successor of St. Peter. Her
 repentance was tardy and fruitless: after the death of the
 old members, the sacred college was filled with French
 cardinals, (84) who beheld Rome and Italy with abhorrence and
 contempt, and perpetuated a series of national, and even
 provincial, popes, attached by the most indissoluble ties to
 their native country.

 Institution of the jubilee, or holy year, A.D. 1300.
 The progress of industry had produced and enriched the
 Italian republics: the aera of their liberty is the most
 flourishing period of population and agriculture, of
 manufactures and commerce; and their mechanic labours were
 gradually refined into the arts of elegance and genius. But
 the position of Rome was less favourable, the territory less
 fruitful: the character of the inhabitants was debased by
 indolence and elated by pride; and they fondly conceived
 that the tribute of subjects must forever nourish the
 metropolis of the church and empire. This prejudice was
 encouraged in some degree by the resort of pilgrims to the
 shrines of the apostles; and the last legacy of the popes,
 the institution of the HOLY YEAR, (85) was not less
 beneficial to the people than to the clergy. Since the loss
 of Palestine, the gift of plenary indulgences, which had
 been applied to the crusades, remained without an object;
 and the most valuable treasure of the church was sequestered
 above eight years from public circulation. A new channel
 was opened by the diligence of Boniface the Eighth, who
 reconciled the vices of ambition and avarice; and the pope
 had sufficient learning to recollect and revive the secular
 games which were celebrated in Rome at the conclusion of
 every century. To sound without danger the depth of popular
 credulity, a sermon was seasonably pronounced, a report was
 artfully scattered, some aged witnesses were produced; and
 on the first of January of the year thirteen hundred, the
 church of St. Peter was crowded with the faithful, who
 demanded the customary indulgence of the holy time. The
 pontiff, who watched and irritated their devout impatience,
 was soon persuaded by ancient testimony of the justice of
 their claim; and he proclaimed a plenary absolution to all
 Catholics who, in the course of that year, and at every
 similar period, should respectfully visit the apostolic
 churches of St. Peter and St. Paul. The welcome sound was
 propagated through Christendom; and at first from the
 nearest provinces of Italy, and at length from the remote
 kingdoms of Hungary and Britain, the highways were thronged
 with a swarm of pilgrims who sought to expiate their sins in
 a journey, however costly or laborious, which was exempt
 from the perils of military service. All exceptions of rank
 or sex, of age or infirmity, were forgotten in the common
 transport; and in the streets and churches many persons were
 trampled to death by the eagerness of devotion. The
 calculation of their numbers could not be easy nor accurate;
 and they have probably been magnified by a dexterous clergy,
 well apprised of the contagion of example: yet we are
 assured by a judicious historian, who assisted at the
 ceremony, that Rome was never replenished with less than two
 hundred thousand strangers; and another spectator has fixed
 at two millions the total concourse of the year. A trifling
 oblation from each individual would accumulate a royal
 treasure; and two priests stood night and day, with rakes in
 their hands, to collect, without counting, the heaps of gold
 and silver that were poured on the altar of St. Paul. (86) It
 was fortunately a season of peace and plenty; and if forage
 was scarce, if inns and lodgings were extravagantly dear, an
 inexhaustible supply of bread and wine, of meat and fish,
 was provided by the policy of Boniface and the venal
 hospitality of the Romans. From a city without trade or
 industry, all casual riches will speedily evaporate: but the
 avarice and envy of the next generation solicited Clement
 the Sixth (87) to anticipate the distant period of the
 century. The gracious pontiff complied with their wishes;
 afforded Rome this poor consolation for his loss; The second jubilee, A.D. 1350.  and justified the change by the name and practice of the Mosaic
 Jubilee. (88) His summons was obeyed; and the number, zeal,
 and liberality of the pilgrims did not yield to the
 primitive festival. But they encountered the triple scourge
 of war, pestilence, and famine: many wives and virgins were
 violated in the castles of Italy; and many strangers were
 pillaged or murdered by the savage Romans, no longer
 moderated by the presence of their bishops. (89) To the
 impatience of the popes we may ascribe the successive
 reduction to fifty, thirty-three, and twenty-five years;
 although the second of these terms is commensurate with the
 life of Christ. The profusion of indulgences, the revolt of
 the Protestants, and the decline of superstition, have much
 diminished the value of the jubilee; yet even the nineteenth
 and last festival was a year of pleasure and profit to the
 Romans; and a philosophic smile will not disturb the triumph
 of the priest or the happiness of the people. (90)
 The nobles, or barons of Rome.
 In the beginning of the eleventh century, Italy was exposed
 to the feudal tyranny, alike oppressive to the sovereign and
 the people. The rights of human nature were vindicated by
 her numerous republics, who soon extended their liberty and
 dominion from the city to the adjacent country. The sword
 of the nobles was broken; their slaves were enfranchised;
 their castles were demolished; they assumed the habits of
 society and obedience; their ambition was confined to
 municipal honours, and in the proudest aristocracy of Venice
 on Genoa, each patrician was subject to the laws. (91) But
 the feeble and disorderly government of Rome was unequal to
 the task of curbing her rebellious sons, who scorned the
 authority of the magistrate within and without the walls.
 It was no longer a civil contention between the nobles and
 plebeians for the government of the state: the barons
 asserted in arms their personal independence; their palaces
 and castles were fortified against a siege; and their
 private quarrels were maintained by the numbers of their
 vassals and retainers. In origin and affection, they were
 aliens to their country: (92) and a genuine Roman, could such
 have been produced, might have renounced these haughty
 strangers, who disdained the appellation of citizens, and
 proudly styled themselves the princes, of Rome. (93) After a
 dark series of revolutions, all records of pedigree were
 lost; the distinction of surnames was abolished; the blood
 of the nations was mingled in a thousand channels; and the
 Goths and Lombards, the Greeks and Franks, the Germans and
 Normans, had obtained the fairest possessions by royal
 bounty, or the prerogative of valour. These examples might
 be readily presumed; but the elevation of a Hebrew race to
 the rank of senators and consuls is an event without a
 parallel in the long captivity of these miserable exiles.
 (94) In the time of Leo the Ninth, a wealthy and learned Jew
 was converted to Christianity, and honoured at his baptism
 with the name of his godfather, the reigning Pope. Family of Leo the jew.  The zeal and courage of Peter the son of Leo were signalized in the  cause of Gregory the Seventh, who entrusted his faithful
 adherent with the government of Adrian's mole, the tower of
 Crescentius, or, as it is now called, the castle of St.
 Angelo. Both the father and the son were the parents of a
 numerous progeny: their riches, the fruits of usury, were
 shared with the noblest families of the city; and so
 extensive was their alliance, that the grandson of the
 proselyte was exalted by the weight of his kindred to the
 throne of St. Peter. A majority of the clergy and people
 supported his cause: he reigned several years in the
 Vatican; and it is only the eloquence of St. Bernard, and
 the final triumph of Innocence the Second, that has branded
 Anacletus with the epithet of antipope. After his defeat
 and death, the posterity of Leo is no longer conspicuous;
 and none will be found of the modern nobles ambitious of
 descending from a Jewish stock. It is not my design to
 enumerate the Roman families which have failed at different
 periods, or those which are continued in different degrees
 of splendour to the present time. (95) The old consular line
 of the Frangipani discover their name in the generous act of
 breaking or dividing bread in a time of famine; and such
 benevolence is more truly glorious than to have enclosed,
 with their allies the Corsi, a spacious quarter of the city
 in the chains of their fortifications; the Savelli, as it
 should seem a Sabine race, have maintained their original
 dignity; the obsolete surname of the Capizucchi is inscribed
 on the coins of the first senators; the Conti preserve the
 honour, without the estate, of the counts of Signia; and the
 Annibaldi must have been very ignorant, or very modest, if
 they had not descended from the Carthaginian hero. (96)
 The Colonna.
 But among, perhaps above, the peers and princes of the city,
 I distinguish the rival houses of COLONNA and URSINI, whose
 private story is an essential part of the annals of modern Rome. I. The name and arms of Colonna (97) have been the
 theme of much doubtful etymology; nor have the orators and
 antiquarians overlooked either Trajan's pillar, or the
 columns of Hercules, or the pillar of Christ's flagellation,
 or the luminous column that guided the Israelites in the
 desert. Their first historical appearance in the year
 eleven hundred and four attests the power and antiquity,
 while it explains the simple meaning, of the name. By the
 usurpation of Cavae, the Colonna provoked the arms of
 Paschal the Second; but they lawfully held in the Campagna
 of Rome the hereditary fiefs of Zagarola and Colonna; and
 the latter of these towns was probably adorned with some
 lofty pillar, the relic of a villa or temple. (98) They
 likewise possessed one moiety of the neighbouring city of
 Tusculum, a strong presumption of their descent from the
 counts of Tusculum, who in the tenth century were the
 tyrants of the apostolic see. According to their own and
 the public opinion, the primitive and remote source was
 derived from the banks of the Rhine; (99) and the sovereigns
 of Germany were not ashamed of a real or fabulous affinity
 with a noble race, which in the revolutions of seven hundred
 years has been often illustrated by merit and always by
 fortune. (100) About the end of the thirteenth century, the
 most powerful branch was composed of an uncle and six
 bothers, all conspicuous in arms, or in the honours of the
 church. Of these, Peter was elected senator of Rome,
 introduced to the Capitol in a triumphal car, and hailed in
 some vain acclamations with the title of Caesar; while John
 and Stephen were declared marquis of Ancona and count of
 Romagna, by Nicholas the Fourth, a patron so partial to
 their family, that he has been delineated in satirical
 portraits, imprisoned as it were in a hollow pillar. (101)
 After his decease their haughty behaviour provoked the
 displeasure of the most implacable of mankind. The two
 cardinals, the uncle and the nephew, denied the election of
 Boniface the Eighth; and the Colonna were oppressed for a
 moment by his temporal and spiritual arms. (102) He
 proclaimed a crusade against his personal enemies; their
 estates were confiscated; their fortresses on either side of
 the Tyber were besieged by the troops of St. Peter and those
 of the rival nobles; and after the ruin of Palestrina or
 Praeneste, their principal seat, the ground was marked with
 a ploughshare, the emblem of perpetual desolation.
 Degraded, banished, proscribed, the six brothers, in
 disguise and danger, wandered over Europe without renouncing
 the hope of deliverance and revenge. In this double hope,
 the French court was their surest asylum; they prompted and
 directed the enterprise of Philip; and I should praise their
 magnanimity, had they respected the misfortune and courage
 of the captive tyrant. His civil acts were annulled by the
 Roman people, who restored the honours and possessions of the
 Colonna; and some estimate may be formed of their wealth by
 their losses, of their losses by the damages of one hundred
 thousand gold florins which were granted them against the
 accomplices and heirs of the deceased pope. All the
 spiritual censures and disqualifications were abolished (103)
 by his prudent successors; and the fortune of the house was
 more firmly established by this transient hurricane. The
 boldness of Sciarra Colonna was signalized in the captivity
 of Boniface, and long afterwards in the coronation of Lewis
 of Bavaria; and by the gratitude of the emperor, the pillar
 in their arms was encircled with a royal crown. But the
 first of the family in fame and merit was the elder Stephen, whom Petrarch loved and esteemed as a hero superior to his own times, and not unworthy of ancient Rome. Persecution and exile displayed to the nations his abilities in peace and war; in his distress he was an object, not of pity, but of reverence; the aspect of danger provoked him to avow his name and country; and when he was asked, "Where is now your fortress?"  he laid his hand on his heart, and answered, "Here."  He supported with the same virtue the return of prosperity; and, till the ruin of his declining age, the ancestors, the character, and the children of Stephen Colonna, exalted his dignity in the Roman republic, and at the court of Avignon. and Ursini. II. The Ursini migrated from Spoleto; (104) the sons of Ursus, as they are styled in the twelfth century, from some eminent person, who is only known as the  father of their race. But they were soon distinguished among the nobles of Rome, by the number and bravery of their kinsmen, the strength of their towers, the honours of the senate and sacred college, and the elevation of two popes, Celestin the Third and Nicholas the Third, of their name and lineage. (105) Their riches may be accused as an early abuse of nepotism: the estates of St. Peter were alienated in their favour by the liberal Celestin; (106) and Nicholas was ambitious for their sake to solicit the alliance of monarchs; to found new kingdoms in Lombardy and Tuscany; and to invest them with the perpetual office of senators of
 Rome. Their hereditary feuds.  All that has been observed of the greatness of the Colonna will likewise redeemed to the glory of the Ursini, their constant and equal antagonists in the long hereditary feud, which distracted above two hundred and fifty years the ecclesiastical state. The jealously of pre-eminence and power was the true ground of their quarrel; but as a specious badge of distinction, the Colonna embraced the name of Ghibelines and the party of the empire; the Ursini espoused the title of Guelphs and the cause of the church. The eagle and the keys were displayed in their adverse banners; and the two factions of Italy most furiously raged when the origin and nature of the dispute were long since forgotten. (107) After the retreat of the popes to Avignon they disputed in arms the vacant republic; and the mischiefs of discord were perpetuated by the wretched compromise of electing each year two rival senators. By their private hostilities the city and country were desolated, and the fluctuating balance inclined with their alternate success. But none of either family had fallen by the sword, till the most renowned champion of the Ursini was surprised and slain by the younger Stephen Colonna. (108) His triumph is stained with the reproach of violating the truce; their defeat was basely
 avenged by the assassination, before the church door, of an innocent boy and his two servants. Yet the victorious Colonna, with an annual colleague, was declared senator of Rome during the term of five years. And the muse of
 Petrarch inspired a wish, a hope, a prediction, that the generous youth, the son of his venerable hero, would restore Rome and Italy to their pristine glory; that his justice would extirpate the wolves and lions, the serpents and
 bears, who labored to subvert the eternal basis of the
 marble COLUMN. (109)