 Of the state of Persia after the restoration of the monarchy by Artaxerxes The barbarians of the East and of the North
WHENEVER Tacitus indulges himself in those beautiful episodes, in which he relates some domestic transaction of the Germans or of the Parthians, his principal object is to relieve the attention of the reader from a uniform scene of vice and misery. From the reign of Augustus to the time of Alexander Severus, the enemies of Rome were in her bosom; the tyrants, and the soldiers; and her prosperity had a very distant and feeble interest in the revolutions that might happen beyond the Rhine and the Euphrates. But when the military order had levelled, in wild anarchy, the power of the prince, the laws of the senate, and even the discipline of the camp, the barbarians of the north and of the east, who had long hovered on the frontier, boldly attacked the  provinces of a declining monarchy. Their vexatious inroads were changed into formidable irruptions, and, after a long vicissitude of mutual calamities, many tribes of the victorious invaders established themselves in the provinces  of the Roman empire. To obtain a clearer knowledge of these great events, we shall endeavour to form a previous idea of the character, forces, and designs of those nations who avenged the cause of Hannibal and Mithridates.

 Revolutions of Asia
 In the more early ages of the world, whilst the forest that covered Europe afforded a retreat to a few wandering savages, the inhabitants of Asia were already collected into populous cities, and reduced under extensive empires, the seat of the arts, of luxury, and of despotism. The Assyrians reigned over the East, (1) till the sceptre of Ninus and Semiramis dropt from the hands of their enervated successors. The Medes and the Babylonians divided their power, and were themselves swallowed up in the monarchy of the Persians, whose arms could not be confined within the
 narrow limits of Asia. Followed, as it is said, by two
 millions of men, Xerxes, the descendant of Cyrus, invaded
 Greece. Thirty thousand soldiers, under the command of
 Alexander, the son of Philip, who was intrusted by the
 Greeks with their glory and revenge, were sufficient to
 subdue Persia. The princes of the house of Seleucus usurped
 and lost the Macedonian command over the East. About the
 same time that, by an ignominious treaty, they resigned to
 the Romans the country on this side Mount Taurus, they were
 driven by the Parthians, an obscure horde of Scythian
 origin, from all the provinces of Upper Asia. The formidable
 power of the Parthians, which spread from India to the
 frontiers of Syrian was in its turn subverted by Ardshir, or
 Artaxerxes; the founder of a new dynasty, which, under the
 name of Sassanides, governed Persia till the invasion of the
 Arabs. This great revolution, whose fatal influence was soon
 experienced by the Romans, happened in the fourth year of
 Alexander Severus, two hundred and twenty-six years after
 the Christian era. (2)
 The Persian monarchy restored by Artaxerxes
 Artaxerxes had served with great reputation in the armies of
 Artaban, the last king of the Parthians, and it appears that
 he was driven into exile and rebellion by royal ingratitude,
 the customary reward for superior merit. His birth was
 obscure, and the obscurity equally gave room to the
 aspersions of his enemies and the flattery of his adherents.
 If we credit the scandal of the former, Artaxerxes sprang
 from the illegitimate commerce of a tanner's wife with a
 common soldier. (3) The latter represent him as descended from
 a branch of the ancient kings of Persia, though time and
 misfortune had gradually reduced his ancestors to the humble
 station of private citizens.  (4) As the lineal heir of the
 monarchy, he asserted his right to the throne, and
 challenged the noble task of delivering the Persians from
 the oppression under which they groaned above five centuries
 since the death of Darius. The Parthians were defeated in
 three great battles. In the last of these their king Artaban
 was slain, and the spirit of the nation was for ever broken.
  (5) The authority of Artaxerxes was solemnly acknowledged in a
 great assembly held at Balch in Khorasan. Two younger
 branches of the royal house of Arsaces were confounded among
 the prostrate satraps. A third, more mindful of ancient
 grandeur than of present necessity, attempted to retire,
 with a numerous train of vassals, towards their kinsman, the
 king of Armenia; but this little army of deserters was
 intercepted, and cut off, by the vigilance of the conqueror,
  (6) who boldly assumed the double diadem, and the title of
 King of Kings, which had been enjoyed by his predecessor.
 But these pompous titles, instead of gratifying the vanity
 of the Persian, served only to admonish him of his duty, and
 to inflame in his soul the ambition of restoring, in their
 full splendour, the religion and empire of Cyrus.

 Reformation of the Magian religion
 I. During the long servitude of Persia under the Macedonian
 and the Parthian yoke, the nations of Europe and Asia had
 mutually adopted and corrupted each other's superstitions.
 The Arsacides, indeed, practised the worship of the Magi;
 but they disgraced and polluted it with a various mixture of
 foreign idolatry. The memory of Zoroaster, the ancient
 prophet and philosopher of the Persians, (7) was still revered
 in the East; but the obsolete and mysterious language in
 which the Zendavesta was composed  (8) opened a field of
 dispute to seventy sects, who variously explained the
 fundamental doctrines of their religion, and were all
 indifferently derided by a crowd of infidels, who rejected
 the divine mission and miracles of the Prophet. To suppress
 the idolaters, re-unite the schismatics, and confute the
 unbelievers, by the infallible decision of a general
 council, the pious Artaxerxes summoned the Magi from all
 parts of his dominions. These priests, who had so long
 sighed in contempt and obscurity, obeyed the welcome
 summons; and on the appointed day appeared, to the number of
 about eighty thousand. But as the debates of so tumultuous
 an assembly could not have been directed by the authority of
 reason, or influenced by the art of policy, the Persian
 synod was reduced, by successive operations, to forty
 thousand, to four thousand, to four hundred, to forty, and
 at last to seven Magi, the most respected for their learning
 and piety. One of these, Erdaviraph, a young but holy
 prelate, received from the hands of his brethren three cups
 of soporiferous wine. He drank them off, and instantly fell
 into a long and profound sleep. As soon as he waked, he
 related to the king and to the believing multitude his
 journey to Heaven, and his intimate conferences with the
 Deity. Every doubt was silenced by this supernatural
 evidence; and the articles of the faith of Zoroaster were
 fixed with equal authority and precision.  (9) A short
 delineation of that celebrated system will be found useful,
 not only to display the character of the Persian nation, but
 to illustrate many of their most important transactions,
 both in peace and war, with the Roman empire. (10)
 Persian theology; two principles
 The great and fundamental article of the system was the
 celebrated doctrine of the two principles; a bold and
 injudicious attempt of Eastern philosophy to reconcile the
 existence of moral and physical evil with the attributes of
 a beneficent Creator and Governor of the world. The first
 and original Being, in whom, or by whom, the universe
 exists, is denominated in the writings of Zoroaster, Time
 without bounds; but it must be confessed that this infinite
 substance seems rather a metaphysical abstraction of the
 mind, than a real object endowed with self-consciousness, or
 possessed of moral perfections. From either the blind or the
 intelligent operation of this infinite Time, which bears but
 too near an affinity with the chaos of the Greeks, the two
 secondary but active principles of the universe were from
 all eternity produced, Ormusd and Ahriman, each of them
 possessed of the powers of creation, but each disposed by
 his invariable nature, to exercise them with different
 designs. The principle of good is eternally absorbed in
 light; the principle of evil eternally buried in darkness.
 The wise benevolence of Ormusd formed man capable of virtue,
 and abundantly provided his fair habitation with the
 materials of happiness. By his vigilant providence, the
 motion of the planets, the order of the seasons, and the
 temperate mixture of the elements are preserved. But the
 malice of Ahriman has long since pierced Ormusd's egg; or,
 in other words, has violated the harmony of his works. Since
 that fatal irruption the most minute articles of good and
 evil are intimately intermingled and agitated together; the
 rankest poisons spring up amidst the most salutary plants;
 deluges, earthquakes, and conflagrations, attest the
 conflict of Nature, and the little world of man is
 perpetually shaken by vice and misfortune. Whilst the rest
 of human kind are led away captives in the chains of their
 infernal enemy, the faithful Persian alone reserves his
 religious adoration for his friend and protector Ormusd, and
 fights under his banner of light, in the full confidence
 that he shall, in the last day, share the glory of his
 triumph. At that decisive period, the enlightened wisdom of
 goodness will render the power of Ormusd superior to the
 furious malice of his rival. Ahriman and his followers,
 disarmed and subdued, will sink into their native darkness;
 and virtue will maintain the eternal peace and harmony of
 the universe. (11)
 Religious Worship
 The theology of Zoroaster was darkly comprehended by
 foreigners, and even by the far greater number of his
 disciples; but the most careless observers were struck with
 the philosophic simplicity of the Persian worship.   Yet, at the same time, in the true spirit of a polytheist, he accuses them of adoring Earth, Water, Fire, the Winds, and the Sun and Moon. But the Persians of every age have denied the charge, and explained the equivocal
 conduct, which might appear to give a colour to it. The elements, and more particularly Fire, Light, and the Sun, whom they called Mithra, were the objects of their religious reverence, because they considered them as the purest symbols, the noblest productions, and the most powerful agents of the Divine Power and Nature. (13)
 Ceremonies and moral precepts
 Every mode of religion, to make a deep and lasting
 impression on the human mind, must exercise our obedience,
 by enjoining practices of devotion; and must acquire our
 esteem, by inculcating moral duties analogous to the
 dictates of our own hearts. The religion of Zoroaster was
 abundantly provided with the former, and possessed a
 sufficient portion of the latter. At the age of puberty, the
 faithful Persian was invested with a mysterious girdle, the
 badge of the divine protection, and from that moment all the
 actions of his life, even the most indifferent, or the most
 necessary, were sanctified by their peculiar prayers,
 ejaculations, or genuflections; the omission of which, under
 any circumstances, was a grievous sin, not inferior in guilt
 to the violation of the moral duties. The moral duties,
 however, of justice, mercy, liberality, etc.; were in their
 turn required of the disciple of Zoroaster, who wished to
 escape the persecution of Ahriman, and to live with Ormusd
 in a blissful eternity, where the degree of felicity will be
 exactly proportioned to the degree of virtue and piety. (14)
 Encouragement of agriculture
 But there are some remarkable instances, in which Zoroaster
 lays aside the prophet, assumes the legislator, and
 discovers a liberal concern for private and public
 happiness, seldom to be found among the grovelling or
 visionary schemes of superstition. Fasting and celibacy, the
 common means of purchasing the Divine favour, he condemns
 with abhorrence, as a criminal rejection of the best gifts
 of Providence. The saint, in the Magian religion, is obliged
 to beget children, to plant useful trees, to destroy noxious
 animals, to convey water to the dry lands of Persia, and to
 work out his salvation by pursuing all the labours of
 agriculture. We may quote from the Zendavesta a wise and
 benevolent maxim, which compensates for many an absurdity.   In the spring of every year a festival was celebrated, destined to represent the primitive equality, and the present connection, of mankind. The stately kings of Persia, exchanging their vain pomp for more genuine greatness, freely mingled with the humblest but most useful of their subjects. On that day the husbandmen were admitted, without distinction, to the table
 of the king, and his satraps. The monarch accepted their petitions, inquired into their grievances, and conversed with them on the most equal terms.   Such a festival must indeed have degenerated, in a wealthy and
 despotic empire, into a theatrical representation; but it
 was at least a comedy well worthy of a royal audiences and
 which might sometimes imprint a salutary lesson on the mind
 of a young prince.

 Power of the Magi
 Had Zoroaster, in all his institutions, invariably supported
 this exalted character, his name would deserve a place with
 those of Numa and Confucius, and his system would be justly
 entitled to all the applause which it has pleased some of
 our divines, and even some of our philosophers, to bestow on
 it. But in that motley composition, dictated by reason and
 passion, by enthusiasm and by selfish motives, some useful
 and sublime truths were disgraced by a mixture of the most
 abject and dangerous superstition. The Magi, or sacerdotal
 order, were extremely numerous, since, as we have already
 seen, four-score thousand of them were convened in a general
 council. Their forces were multiplied by discipline. A
 regular hierarchy was diffused through all the provinces of
 Persia; and the Archimagus, who resided at Balch, was
 respected as the visible head of the church, and the lawful
 successor of Zoroaster. (17) The property of the Magi was very
 considerable. Besides the less invidious possession of a
 large tract of the most fertile lands of Media, (18) they
 levied a general tax on the fortunes and the industry of the
 Persians. (19)  These convenient maxims of reverence and implicit faith were
 doubtless imprinted with care on the tender minds of youth;
 since the Magi were the masters of education in Persia, and
 to their hands the children even of the royal family were
 intrusted. (21) The Persian priests, who were of a speculative genius, preserved and investigated the secrets of Oriental philosophy and acquired, either by superior knowledge or
 superior art, the reputation of being well versed in some
 occult sciences, which have derived their appellation from
 the Magi. (22) Those of more active dispositions mixed with the world in courts and cities; and it is observed, that the administration of Artaxerxes was in a great measure directed
 by the counsels of the sacerdotal order, whose dignity,
 either from policy or devotion, that prince restored to its
 ancient splendour. (23)
 Spirit of persecution
 The first counsel of the Magi was agreeable to the
 unsociable genius of their faith,  (24) to the practice of
 ancient kings,  (25) and even to the example of their
 legislator, who had fallen a victim to a religious war,
 excited by his own intolerant zeal.  (26) By an edict of
 Artaxerxes, the exercise of every worship, except that of
 Zoroaster, was severely prohibited. The temples of the
 Parthians, and the statues of their deified monarchs, were
 thrown down with ignominy.  (27) The sword of Aristotle (such
 was the name given by the Orientals to the polytheism and
 philosophy of the Greeks) was easily broken ; (28) the flames
 of persecution soon reached the more stubborn Jews and
 Christians; (29) nor did they spare the heretics of their own
 nation and religion. The majesty of Ormusd, who was jealous
 of a rival, was seconded by the despotism of Artaxerxes, who
 could not suffer a rebel; and the schismatics within his
 vast empire were soon reduced to the inconsiderable number
 of eighty thousand.  (30) This spirit of persecution reflects
 dishonour on the religion of Zoroaster; but as it was not
 productive of any civil commotion, it served to strengthen
 the new monarchy, by uniting all the various inhabitants of
 Persia in the bands of religious zeal.

 Establishment of the royal authority in the provinces
 II. Artaxerxes, by his valour and conduct, had wrested the
 sceptre of the East from the ancient royal family of
 Parthia. There still remained the more difficult task of
 establishing, throughout the vast extent of Persia, a
 uniform and vigorous administration. The weak indulgence of
 the Arsacides had resigned to their sons and brothers the
 principal provinces, and the greatest offices of the
 kingdom, in the nature of hereditary possessions. The
 vitaxae, or eighteen most powerful satraps, were permitted
 to assume the regal title and the vain pride of the monarch
 was delighted with a nominal dominion over so many vassal
 kings. Even tribes of barbarians in their mountains, and the
 Greek cities of Upper Asia, (31) within their walls scarcely
 acknowledged, or seldom obeyed, any superior; and the
 Parthian empire exhibited, under other names, a lively image
 of the feudal system (32) which has since prevailed in Europe.
 But the active victor, at the head of a numerous and
 disciplined army, visited in person every province of
 Persia. The defeat of the boldest rebels, and the reduction
 of the strongest fortifications,  (33) diffused the terror of
 his arms, and prepared the way for the peaceful reception of
 his authority. An obstinate resistance was fatal to the
 chiefs; but their followers were treated with lenity. (34) A
 cheerful submission was rewarded with honours and riches;
 but the prudent Artaxerxes, suffering no person except
 himself to assume the title of king, abolished every
 intermediate power between the throne and the people.

 Extent and population of Persia
 His kingdom, nearly equal in extent to modern Persia, was, on
 every side, bounded by the sea, or by great rivers, by the
 Euphrates, the Tigris, the Araxes, the Oxus, and the Indus,
 by the Caspian Sea, and the Gulf of Persian. (35) That country
 was computed to contain, in the last century, five hundred
 and fifty-four cities, sixty thousand villages, and about
 forty millions of souls. (36) If we compare the administration
 of the house of Sassan with that of the house of Sefi, the
 political influence of the Magian with that of the Mahometan
 religion, we shall probably infer, that the kingdom of
 Artaxerxes contained at least as great a number of cities,
 villages, and inhabitants. But it must likewise be
 confessed, that in every age the want of harbours on the
 sea-coast, and the scarcity of fresh water in the inland
 provinces, have been very unfavourable to the commerce and
 agriculture of the Persians; who, in the calculation of
 their numbers, seem to have indulged one of the meanest,
 though most common, articles of national vanity.

 Recapitulation of the war between the Parthian and Roman empire
 As soon as the ambitious mind of Artaxerxes had triumphed
 over the resistance of his vassals, he began to threaten the
 neighbouring states, who, during the long slumber of his
 predecessors, had insulted Persia with impunity. He obtained
 some easy victories over the wild Scythians and the
 effeminate Indians; but the Romans were an enemy who, by
 their past injuries and present power, deserved the utmost
 efforts of his arms. A forty years' tranquillity, the fruit
 of valour and moderation, had succeeded the victories of
 Trajan. During the period that elapsed from the accession of
 Marcus to the reign of Alexander, the Roman and the Parthian
 empires were twice engaged in war; and although the whole
 strength of the Arsacides contended with a part only of the
 forces of Rome, the event was most commonly in favour of the
 latter. Macrinus, indeed, prompted by his precarious
 situation and pusillanimous temper, purchased a peace at the
 expense of near two millions of our money;  (37) but the
 generals of Marcus, the emperor Severus, and his son,
 erected many trophies in Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria.
 Among their exploits, the imperfect relation of which would
 have unseasonably interrupted the more important series of
 domestic revolutions, we shall only mention the repeated
 calamities of the two great cities of Seleucia and
 Ctesiphon.

 Cities of Seleucia and Ctesiphon
 Seleucia, on the western bank of the Tigris, about
 forty-five miles to the north of ancient Babylon, was the
 capital of the Macedonian conquests in Upper Asia. (38) Many
 ages after the fall of their empire, Seleucia retained the
 genuine characters of a Grecian colony, arts, military
 virtue, and the love of freedom. The independent republic
 was governed by a senate of three hundred nobles; the people
 consisted of six hundred thousand citizens the walls were
 strong, and as long as concord prevailed among the several
 orders of the state, they viewed with contempt the power of
 the Parthian: but the madness of faction was sometimes
 provoked to implore the dangerous aid of the common enemy,
 who was posted almost at the gates of the colony. (39) The
 Parthian monarchs, like the Mogul sovereigns of Hindostan,
 delighted in the pastoral life of their Scythian ancestor;
 and the Imperial camp was frequently pitched in the plain of
 Ctesiphon, on the eastern bank of the Tigris, at the
 distance of only three miles from Seleucia.  (40) The
 innumerable attendants on luxury and despotism resorted to
 the court, and the little village of Ctesiphon insensibly
 swelled into a great city. (41) Under the reign of Marcus, the
 Roman generals (A.D. 165) penetrated as far as Ctesiphon and
 Seleucia. They were received as friends by the Greek colony;
 they attacked as enemies the seat of the Parthian kings; yet
 both cities experienced the same treatment. The sack and
 conflagration of Seleucia, with the massacre of three
 hundred thousand of the inhabitants, tarnished the glory of
 the Roman triumph.  (42) Seleucia, already exhausted by the
 neighbourhood of a too powerful rival, sunk under the fatal
 blow; but Ctesiphon (A.D. 198), in about thirty-three years,
 had sufficiently recovered its strength to maintain an
 obstinate siege against the emperor Severus. The city was;
 however, taken by assault; the king, who defended it in
 person, escaped with precipitation; an hundred thousand
 captives, and a rich booty, rewarded the fatigues of the
 Roman soldiers.  (43) Notwithstanding these misfortunes,
 Ctesiphon succeeded to Babylon and to Seleucia, as one of
 the great capitals of the East. In summer, the monarch of
 Persia enjoyed at Ecbatana the cool breezes of the mountains
 of Media; but the mildness of the climate engaged him to
 prefer Ctesiphon for his winter residence.

 Conquest of Osrhoene by the Romans
 From these successful inroads, the Romans derived no real or
 lasting benefit; nor did they attempt to preserve such
 distant conquests, separated from the provinces of the
 empire by a large tract of intermediate desert. The
 reduction of the kingdom of Osrhoene was an acquisition of
 less splendour indeed, but of a far more solid advantage.
 That little state occupied the northern and most fertile
 part of Mesopotamia, between the Euphrates and the Tigris.
 Edessa, its capital, was situated about twenty miles beyond
 the former of those rivers, and the inhabitants, since the
 time of Alexander, were a mixed race of Greeks, Arabs,
 Syrians, and Armenians.  (44) The feeble sovereigns of
 Osrhoene, placed on the dangerous verge of two contending
 empires, were attached from inclination to the Parthian
 cause; but the superior power of Rome exacted from them a
 reluctant homage, which is still attested by their medals.
 After the conclusion of the Parthian war under Marcus, it
 was judged prudent to secure some substantial pledges of
 their doubtful fidelity. Forts were constructed in several
 parts of the country, and a Roman garrison was fixed in the
 strong town of Nisibis. During the troubles that followed
 the death of Commodus, the princes of Osrhoene attempted to
 shake off the yoke; but the stern policy of Severus
 confirmed their dependence,  (45) and the perfidy of Caracalla
 completed the easy conquest. Abgarus, the last king of
 Edessa, was (A.D. 216) sent in chains to Rome, his dominions
 reduced into a province, and his capital dignified with the
 rank of colony and thus the Romans, about ten years before
 the fall of the Parthian monarchy, obtained a firm and
 permanent establishment beyond the Euphrates. (46)
 Artaxerxes claims the provinces of Asia, and declares war against the Romans
 Prudence as well as glory might have justified a war on the
 side of Artaxerxes, had his views been confined to the
 defence or the acquisition of a useful frontier. But the
 ambitious Persian openly avowed a far more extensive design
 of conquest; and (A.D. 230) he thought himself able to
 support his lofty pretensions by the arms of reason as well
 as by those of power. Cyrus, he alleged, had first subdued,
 and his successors had for a long time possessed, the whole
 extent of Asia, as far as the Propontis and the AEgean sea;
 the provinces of Caria and Ionia, under their empire, had
 been governed by Persian satraps, and all Egypt, to the
 confines of Ethiopia, had acknowledged their sovereignty. (47)
 Their rights had been suspended, but not destroyed, by a
 long usurpation; and as soon as he received the Persian
 diadem, which birth and successful valour had placed upon
 his head, the first great duty of his station called upon
 him to restore the ancient limits and splendour of the
 monarchy. The Great King, therefore (such was the haughty
 style of his embassies to the emperor Alexander), commanded
 the Romans instantly to depart from all the provinces of his
 ancestors, and, yielding to the Persians the empire of Asia,
 to content themselves with the undisturbed possession of
 Europe. This haughty mandate was delivered by four hundred
 of the tallest and most beautiful of the Persians; who, by
 their fine horses, splendid arms, and rich apparel,
 displayed the pride and greatness of their master. (48) Such
 an embassy was much less an offer of negotiation than a
 declaration of war. Both Alexander Severus and Artaxerxes,
 collecting the military force of the Roman and Persian
 monarchies, resolved in this important contest to lead their
 armies in person.

 Pretended victory of Alexander Severus
 If we credit what should seem the most authentic of all
 records, an oration, still extant, and delivered by the
 emperor himself to the senate, we must allow that the
 victory of Alexander Severus was not inferior to any of
 those formerly obtained over the Persians by the son of
 Philip. The army of the Great King consisted of one hundred
 and twenty thousand horse, clothed in complete armour of
 steel; of seven hundred elephants, with towers filled with
 archers on their backs; and of eighteen hundred chariots,
 armed with scythes. This formidable host, the like of which
 is not to be found in eastern history, and has scarcely been
 imagined in eastern romance,  (49) was (A.D. 233) discomfited
 in a great battle, in which the Roman Alexander approved
 himself an intrepid soldier and a skilful general. The Great
 King fled before his valour; an immense booty, and the
 conquest of Mesopotamia, were the immediate fruits of this
 signal victory. Such are the circumstances of. this
 ostentatious and improbable relation, dictated, as it too
 plainly appears, by the vanity of the monarch, adorned by
 the unblushing servility of his flatterers, and received
 without contradiction by a distant and obsequious senate. (50)
 Far from being inclined to believe that the arms of
 Alexander obtained any memorable advantage over the
 Persians, we are induced to suspect that all this blaze of
 imaginary glory was designed to conceal some real disgrace.

 More probable account of the war. 
 Our suspicions are confirmed by the authority of a
 contemporary historian, who mentions the virtues of
 Alexander with respect, and his faults with candour. He
 describes the judicious plan which had been formed for the
 conduct of he war. Three Roman armies were destined to
 invade Persia at the same time, and by different roads. But
 the operations of the campaign, though wisely concerted,
 were not executed either with ability or success. The first
 of these Armies, as soon as it had entered the marshy plains
 of Babylon, towards the artificial conflux of the Euphrates
 and the Tigris,  (51) was encompassed by the superior numbers,
 and destroyed by the arrows, of the enemy. The alliance of
 Chosroes, king of Armenia,  (52) and the long tract of
 mountainous country, in which the Persian cavalry was of
 little service, opened a secure entrance into the heart of
 Media to the second of the Roman armies. These brave troops
 laid waste the adjacent provinces, and by several successful
 actions against Artaxerxes, gave a faint colour to the
 emperor's vanity. But the retreat of this victorious army
 was imprudent, or at least unfortunate. In repassing the
 mountains great numbers of soldiers perished by the badness
 of the roads, and the severity of the winter season. It had
 been resolved, that whilst these two great detachments
 penetrated into the opposite extremes of the Persian
 dominions, the main body, under the command of Alexander
 himself, should support their attack by invading the centre
 of the kingdom. But the inexperienced youth, influenced by
 his mother's counsels, and perhaps by his own fears,
 deserted the bravest troops and the fairest prospect of
 victory; and after consuming in Mesopotamia in inactive and
 inglorious summer, he led back to Antioch an army diminished
 by sickness, and provoked by disappointment. The behaviour
 of Artaxerxes had been very different. Flying with rapidity
 from the hills of Media to the marshes of the Euphrates, he
 had everywhere opposed the invaders in person; and in either
 fortune had united with the ablest conduct the most
 undaunted resolution. But in several obstinate engagements
 against the veteran legions of Rome, the Persian monarch had
 lost the flower of his troops. Even his victories had
 weakened his power. The favourable opportunities of the
 absence of Alexander, and of the confusions that followed
 that emperor's death, presented themselves in vain to his
 ambition. Instead of expelling the Romans, as he pretended,
 from the continent of Asia, he found himself unable to wrest
 from their hands the little province of Mesopotamia. (53)
 Character and maxims of Artaxerxes
 The reign of Artaxerxes, which from the last defeat of the
 Parthians (A.D. 240) lasted only fourteen years, forms a
 memorable era in the history of the East, and even in that
 of Rome. His character seems to have been marked by those
 bold and commanding features that generally distinguished
 the princes who conquer, from those who inherit, an empire.
 Till the last period of the Persian monarchy his code of
 laws was respected as the groundwork of their civil and
 religious policy. (54) Several of his sayings are preserved. One of them in particular discovers a deep insight into the constitution of government.   Artaxerxes bequeathed his new empire, and his ambitious designs against the Romans, to Sapor, a son not unworthy of his great father; but those designs were too extensive for the power of Persia, and served only to involve both nations in a long series of destructive wars and reciprocal calamities.

 Military power of the Persians. 
 The Persians, long since civilised and corrupted, were very
 far from possessing the martial independence and the
 intrepid hardness, both of mind and body, which have
 rendered the northern barbarians masters of the world. The
 science of war, that constituted the more rational force of Greece and Rome, as it now does of Europe, never made any considerable progress in the East. Those disciplined evolutions which harmonise and animate a confused multitude
 were unknown to the Persians. They were equally unskilled in the arts of constructing, besieging, or defending regular fortifications. They trusted more to their courage than to their discipline. Their infantry contemptible The infantry was a half-armed spiritless crowd of peasants, levied in haste by the allurements of plunder, and as easily dispersed by a victory as by a defeat. The monarch and his nobles transported into the camp the pride and luxury of the seraglio. Their: military operations were impeded by a useless train of women, eunuchs, horses, and camels, and in the midst of a successful campaign the Persian host was often separated or destroyed by an unexpected famine. (56)
 Their cavalry excellent. 
 But the nobles of Persia, in the bosom of luxury and
 despotism, preserved a strong sense of personal gallantry
 and national honour. From the age of seven years they were
 taught to speak truth, to shoot with the bow, and to ride;
 and it was universally confessed, that in the two last of
 these arts they had made a more than common proficiency. (57)
 The most distinguished youth were educated under the
 monarch's eye, practised their exercises in the gate of his
 palace, and were severely trained up to the habits of
 temperance and obedience in their long and laborious parties
 of hunting. In every province the satrap maintained a like
 school of military virtue. The Persian nobles (so natural is
 the idea of feudal tenures) received from the king's bounty
 lands and houses, on the condition of their service in war.
 They were ready on the first summons to mount on horseback,
 with a martial and splendid train of followers, and to join
 the numerous bodies of guards, who were carefully selected
 from amongst the most robust slaves, and the bravest
 adventurers of Asia. These armies, both of light and of
 heavy cavalry, equally formidable by the impetuosity of
 their charge, and the rapidity of their motions, threatened,
 as an impending cloud, the eastern provinces of the
 declining empire of Rome. (58)