Origin, Progress, and Effects of the Monastic Life.—Conversion of the Barbarians to Christianity and Arianism.—Persecution of the Vandals in Africa.—Extinction of Arianism among the Barbarians.  I The Monastic Life.
Origin of the monks. 
 THE indissoluble connection of civil and ecclesiastical
 affairs has compelled and encouraged me to relate the
 progress, the persecutions, the establishment, the
 divisions, the final triumph, and the gradual corruption of
 Christianity. I have purposely delayed the consideration of
 two religious events interesting in the study of human
 nature, and important in the decline and fall of the Roman
 empire. I. The institution of the monastic life; (1) and II. 
 The conversion of the northern barbarians.

  I. Prosperity and peace introduced the distinction of the
 vulgar and the Ascetic Christians. (2) The loose and 
 imperfect practice of religion satisfied the conscience of
 the multitude. The prince or magistrate, the soldier or
 merchant, reconciled their fervent zeal and implicit faith
 with the exercise of their profession, the pursuit of their
 interest, and the indulgence of their passions but the
 Ascetics, who obeyed and abused the rigid precepts of the
 Gospel, were inspired by the savage enthusiasm which
 represents man as a criminal, and God as a tyrant. They
 seriously renounced the business and the pleasures of the
 age; abjured the use of wine, of flesh, and of marriage;
 chastised their body, mortified their affections, and
 embraced a life of misery, as the price of eternal
 happiness. In the reign of Constantine the Ascetics fled
 from a profane and degenerate world to perpetual solitude or
 religious society. Like the first Christians of Jerusalem, (3) 
 they resigned the use or the property of their temporal
 possessions; established regular communities of the same sex
 and a similar disposition; and assumed the names of
 Hermits,Monks, and Anachorets, expressive of their
 lonely retreat in a natural or artificial desert. They soon
 acquired the respect of the world, which they despised; and
 the loudest applause was bestowed on this DIVINE PHILOSOPHY,
 (4) which surpassed, without the aid of science or reason, the 
 laborious virtues of the Grecian schools. The monks might
 indeed contend with the Stoics in the contempt of fortune,
 of pain, and of death: the Pythagorean silence and
 submission were revived in their servile discipline; and
 they disdained as firmly as the Cynics themselves all the
 forms and decencies of civil society. But the votaries of
 this Divine Philosophy aspired to imitate a purer and more
 perfect model. They trod in the footsteps of the prophets,
 who had retired to the desert ; (5) and they restored the 
 devout and contemplative life, which had been instituted by
 the Essenians in Palestine and Egypt. The philosophic eye of
 Pliny had surveyed with astonishment a solitary people, who
 dwelt among the palm-trees near the Dead Sea; who subsisted
 without money; who were propagated without women; and who
 derived from the disgust and repentance of mankind a
 perpetual supply of voluntary associates. (6)
 Anthony and the monks of Egypt, A.D. 305. 
 Egypt, the fruitful parent of superstition, afforded the
 first example of the monastic life. Antony, (7) an illiterate 
 (8) youth of the lower parts of Thebais, distributed his 
 patrimony, (9) deserted his family and native home, and 
 executed his monastic penance with original and intrepid
 fanaticism. After a long and painful novitiate among the
 tombs and in a ruined tower, he boldly advanced into the
 desert three days' journey to the eastward of the Nile;
 discovered a lonely spot, which possessed the advantages of
 shade and water; and fixed his last residence on Mount
 Colzim, near the Red Sea, where an ancient monastery still
 preserves the name and memory of the saint. (10) The curious 
 devotion of the Christians pursued him to the desert; and
 when he was obliged to appear at Alexandria, in the face of
 mankind, he supported his fame with discretion and dignity.
 He enjoyed the friendship of Athanasius, whose doctrine he
 approved; and the Egyptian peasant respectfully declined a
 respectful invitation from the emperor Constantine. 
 A.D. 251-356. The venerable patriarch (for Antony attained the age of one
 hundred and five years) beheld the numerous progeny which
 had been formed by his example and his lessons. The prolific
 colonies of monks multiplied with rapid increase on the
 sands of Libya, upon the rocks of Thebais, and in the cities
 of the Nile. To the south of Alexandria, the mountain, and
 adjacent desert, of Nitria was peopled by five thousand
 anachorets; and the traveller may still investigate the
 ruins of fifty monasteries, which were planted in that
 barren soil by the disciples of Antony. (11) In the Upper 
 Thebais, the vacant island of Tabenne, (12) was occupied by 
 Pachomius and fourteen hundred of his brethren. That holy
 abbot successively founded nine monasteries of men, and one
 of women; and the festival of Easter sometimes collected
 fifty thousand religious persons, who followed his angelic
 rule of discipline. (13) The stately and populous city of 
 Oxyrinchus, the seat of Christian orthodoxy, had devoted the
 temples, the public edifices, and even the ramparts, to
 pious and charitable uses; and the bishop, who might preach
 in twelve churches, computed ten thousand females, and
 twenty thousand males, of the monastic profession. (14) The 
 Egyptians, who gloried in this marvellous revolution, were
 disposed to hope, and to believe, that the number of the
 monks was equal to the remainder of the people; (15) and 
 posterity might repeat the saying which had formerly been
 applied to the sacred animals of the same country, that in
 Egypt it was less difficult to find a god than a man.


 Propagation of the monastic life at Rome, A.D. 341. 
 Athanasius introduced into Rome the knowledge and practice
 of the monastic life; and a school of this new philosophy
 was opened by the disciples of Antony, who accompanied their
 primate to the holy threshold of the Vatican. The strange and savage appearance of these Egyptians excited, at first, horror and contempt, and, at length, applause and zealous imitation. The senators, and more especially the matrons, transformed their palaces and villas into religious houses; and the narrow institution of six Vestals was eclipsed by the frequent monasteries, which were seated on the ruins of ancient temples and in the midst of the Roman Forum. (16) Inflamed by the example of Antony,  Hilarion in Palestine, A.D. 328. a Syrian youth, whose name was Hilarion, (17) fixed his dreary abode on a sandy beach between the sea and a morass about seven miles from Gaza. The austere penance, in which he persisted forty-eight years, diffused a similar enthusiasm; and the holy man was followed by a train of two or three thousand anachorets, whenever he visited the innumerable monasteries of Palestine. Basil in Pontus, A.D. 360. The fame of Basil (18) is immortal in the monastic history of the East. With a mind that had tasted the learning and eloquence of Athens; with an ambition scarcely to be satisfied by the archbishopric of Casarea, Basil retired to a savage solitude in Pontus; and deigned, for a while, to give laws to the spiritual colonies which he profusely scattered along the coast of the Black Sea. Martin in Gaul, A.D. 370. In the West, Martin of Tours, (19) a soldier, a hermit, a bishop, and a saint, established the monasteries of Gaul; two thousand of his disciples followed him to the grave; and his eloquent historian challenges the deserts of Thebais to produce, in a more favourable climate, a champion of equal virtue. The progress of the monks was not less rapid or universal than that of Christianity itself. Every province, and, at last, every city, of the empire was filled with their increasing multitudes; and the bleak and barren isles, from Lerins to Lipari, that arise out of the Tuscan Sea, were chosen by the anachorets for the place of their voluntary exile. An easy and perpetual intercourse by sea and land connected the provinces of the Roman world; and the life of Hilarion displays the facility with which an indigent hermit of Palestine might traverse Egypt, embark for Sicily, escape to Epirus, and finally settle in the island of Cyprus. (20) The Latin Christians embraced the religious institutions of Rome. The pilgrims who visited Jerusalem eagerly copied, in the most distant climates of the earth, the faithful model of the monastic life. The disciples of Antony spread themselves beyond the tropic, over the Christian empire of Ethiopia. (21) The monastery of Banchors (22) in Flintshire, which contained above two thousand brethren, dispersed a numerous colony among the barbarians of Ireland; (23) and Iona, one of the Hebrides, which was planted by the Irish monks, diffused over the northern regions a doubtful ray of science and superstition. (24)
 Causes of its rapid progress. 
 These unhappy exiles from social life were impelled by the
 dark and implacable genius of superstition. Their mutual
 resolution was supported by the example of millions, of
 either sex, of every age, and of every rank; and each
 proselyte who entered the gates of a monastery was persuaded
 that he trod the steep and thorny path of eternal happiness.
 (25) But the operation of these religious motives was 
 variously determined by the temper and situation of mankind.
 Reason might subdue, or passion might suspend, their
 influence; but they acted most forcibly on the infirm minds
 of children and females; they were strengthened by secret
 remorse or accidental misfortune; and they might derive some
 aid from the temporal considerations of vanity or interest.
 It was naturally supposed that the pious and humble monks,
 who had renounced the world to accomplish the work of their
 salvation, were the best qualified for the spiritual
 government of the Christians. The reluctant hermit was torn
 from his cell, and seated amidst the acclamations of the
 people, on the episcopal throne: the monasteries of Egypt,
 of Gaul, and of the East, supplied a regular succession of
 saints and bishops; and ambition soon discovered the secret
 road which led to the possession of wealth and honours. (26) 
 The popular monks, whose reputation was connected with the
 fame and success of the order, assiduously laboured to
 multiply the number of their fellow-captives. They
 insinuated themselves into noble and opulent families, and
 the specious arts of flattery and seduction were employed to
 secure those proselytes who might bestow wealth or dignity
 on the monastic profession. The indignant father bewailed
 the loss, perhaps, of an only son; (27) the credulous maid was 
 betrayed by vanity to violate the laws of nature; and the
 matron aspired to imaginary perfection by renouncing the
 virtues of domestic life. Paula yielded to the persuasive
 eloquence of Jerom; (28) and the profane title of 
 mother-in-law of God (29) tempted that illustrious widow to 
 consecrate the virginity of her daughter Eustochium. By the
 advice, and in the company, of her spiritual guide, Paula
 abandoned Rome and her infant son; retired to the holy
 village of Bethlem; founded an hospital and four monasteries
 and acquired, by her alms and penance, an eminent and
 conspicuous station in the Catholic church. Such rare and
 illustrious penitents were celebrated as the glory and
 example of their age; but the monasteries were filled by a
 crowd of obscure and abject plebeians, (30) who gained in the 
 cloister much more than they had sacrificed in the world.
 Peasants, slaves, and mechanics might escape from poverty
 and contempt to a safe and honourable profession, whose
 apparent hardships were mitigated by custom, by popular
 applause, and by the secret relaxation of discipline. (31) The 
 subjects of Rome, whose persons and fortunes were made
 responsible for unequal and exorbitant tributes, retired
 from the oppression of the Imperial government; and the
 pusillanimous youth preferred the penance of a monastic, to
 the dangers of a military, life. The affrighted provincials
 of every rank, who fled before the barbarians, found shelter
 and subsistence; whole legions were buried in these
 religious sanctuaries; and the same cause which relieved the
 distress of individuals impaired the strength and fortitude
 of the empire. (32)
 Obedience of the monks. 
 The monastic profession of the ancients (33) was an act of 
 voluntary devotion. The inconstant fanatic was threatened
 with the eternal vengeance of the God whom he deserted, but
 the doors of the monastery were still open for repentance.
 Those monks whose conscience was fortified by reason or
 passion were at liberty to resume the character of men and
 citizens; and even the spouses of Christ might accept the
 legal embraces of an earthly lover. (34) The examples of 
 scandal, and the progress of superstition, suggested the
 propriety of more forcible restraints. After a sufficient
 trial, the fidelity of the novice was secured by a solemn
 and perpetual vow; and his irrevocable engagement was
 ratified by the laws of the church and state. A guilty
 fugitive was pursued, arrested, and restored to his
 perpetual prison; and the interposition of the magistrate
 oppressed the freedom and merit which had alleviated, in
 some degree, the abject slavery of the monastic discipline.
 (35) The actions of a monk, his words, and even his thoughts, 
 were determined. by an inflexible rule (36) or a capricious 
 superior: the slightest offences were corrected by disgrace
 or confinement, extraordinary fasts, or bloody flagellation;
 and disobedience, murmur, or delay were ranked in the
 catalogue of the most heinous sins. (37) A blind submission to 
 the commands of the abbot, however absurd, or even criminal,
 they might seem, was the ruling principle, the first virtue
 of the Egyptian monks; and their patience was frequently
 exercised by the most extravagant trials. They were directed
 to remove an enormous rock; assiduously to water a barren
 staff that was planted in the ground, till, at the end of
 three years, it should vegetate and blossom like a tree; to
 walk into a fiery furnace; or to cast their infant into a
 deep pond: and several saints, or madmen, have been
 immortalised in monastic story by their thoughtless and
 fearless obedience. (38) The freedom of the mind, the source 
 of every generous and rational sentiment, was destroyed by
 the habits of credulity and submission; and the monk,
 contracting the vices of a slave, devoutly followed the
 faith and passions of his ecclesiastical tyrant. The peace
 of the Eastern church was invaded by a swarm of fanatics,
 incapable of fear, or reason, or humanity; and the Imperial
 troops acknowledged, without shame, that they were much less
 apprehensive of an encounter with the fiercest barbarians.
 (39)
 Their dress and habitations. 
 Superstition has often framed and consecrated the fantastic
 garments of the monks: (40) but their apparent singularity 
 sometimes proceeds from their uniform attachment to a simple
 and primitive model, which the revolutions of fashion have
 made ridiculous in the eyes of mankind. The father of the
 Benedictines expressly disclaims all idea of choice or
 merit; and soberly exhorts his disciples to adopt the coarse
 and convenient dress of the countries which they may
 inhabit. (41) The monastic habits of the ancients varied with 
 the climate and their mode of life; and they assumed, with
 the same indifference, the sheepskin of the Egyptian
 peasants or the cloak of the Grecian philosophers. They
 allowed themselves the use of linen in Egypt, where it was a
 cheap and domestic manufacture; but in the West they
 rejected such an expensive article of foreign luxury. (42) It 
 was the practice of the monks either to cut or shave their
 hair; they wrapped their heads in a cowl, to escape the
 sight of profane objects; their legs and feet were naked,
 except in the extreme cold of winter; and their slow and
 feeble steps were supported by a long staff. The aspect of a
 genuine anachoret was horrid and disgusting: every sensation
 that is offensive to man was thought acceptable to God; and
 the angelic rule of Tabenne condemned the salutary custom of
 bathing the limbs in water and of anointing them with oil.
 (43) The austere monks slept on the ground, on a hard mat or a 
 rough blanket; and the same bundle of palm-leaves served
 them as a seat in the day and a pillow in the night. Their
 original cells were low narrow huts, built of the slightest
 materials; which formed, by the regular distribution of the
 streets, a large and populous village, enclosing, within the
 common wall, a church, a hospital, perhaps a library, some
 necessary offices, a garden, and a fountain or reservoir of
 fresh water. Thirty or forty brethren composed a family of
 separate discipline and diet; and the great monasteries of
 Egypt consisted of thirty or forty families.

 Their diet. 
 Pleasure and guilt are synonymous terms in the language of
 the monks, and they had discovered, by experience, that
 rigid fasts and abstemious diet are the most effectual
 preservatives against the impure desires of the flesh. (44) 
 The rules of abstinence which they imposed, or practised,
 were not uniform or perpetual: the cheerful festival of the
 Pentecost was balanced by the extraordinary mortification of
 Lent; the fervour of new monasteries was insensibly relaxed;
 and the voracious appetite of the Gauls could not imitate
 the patient and temperate virtue of the Egyptians. (45) The 
 disciples of Antony and Pachomius were satisfied with their
 daily pittance (46) of twelve ounces of bread, or rather 
 biscuit, (47) which they divided into two frugal repasts, of 
 the afternoon and of the evening. It was esteemed a merit,
 and almost a duty, to abstain from the boiled vegetables
 which were provided for the refectory; but the extraordinary
 bounty of the abbot sometimes indulged them with the luxury
 of cheese, fruit, salad, and the small dried fish of the
 Nile. (48) A more ample latitude of sea and river fish was 
 gradually allowed or assumed; but the use of flesh was long
 confined to the sick or travellers: and when it gradually
 prevailed in the less rigid monasteries of Europe, a
 singular distinction was introduced; as if birds, whether
 wild or domestic, had been less profane than the grosser
 animals of the field. Water was the pure and innocent
 beverage of the primitive monks; and the founder of the
 Benedictines regrets the daily portion of half a pint of
 wine which had been extorted from him by the intemperance of
 the age. (49) Such an allowance might be easily supplied by 
 the vineyard of Italy; and his victorious disciples, who
 passed the Alps, the Rhine, and the Baltic, required, in the
 place of wine, an adequate compensation of strong beer or
 cider.

 Their manual labour. 
 The candidate who aspired to the virtue of evangelical
 poverty, abjured, at his first entrance to a regular
 community, the idea, and even the name, of all separate or
 exclusive possession. (50) The brethren were supported by 
 their manual labour; and the duty of labour was strenuously
 recommended as a penance, as an exercise, and as the most
 laudable means of securing their daily subsistence. (51) The 
 garden and fields, which the industry of the monks had often
 rescued from the forest or the morass, were diligently
 cultivated by their hands. They performed, without
 reluctance, the menial offices of slaves and domestics; and
 the several trades that were necessary to provide their
 habits, their utensils, and their lodging, were exercised
 within the precincts of the great monasteries. The monastic
 studies have tended, for the most part to darken, rather
 than to dispel, the cloud of superstition. Yet the curiosity
 or zeal of some learned solitaries has cultivated the
 ecclesiastical and even the profane sciences: and posterity
 must gratefully acknowledge that the monuments of Greek and
 Roman literature have been preserved and multiplied by their
 indefatigable pens. (52) But the more humble industry of the 
 monks, especially in Egypt, was contented with the silent,
 sedentary occupation of making wooden sandals, or of
 twisting the leaves of the palm-tree into mats and baskets.
 The superfluous stock, which was not consumed in domestic
 use, supplied, by trade, the wants of the community: the
 boats of Tabenne, and the other monasteries of Thebais,
 descended the Nile as far as Alexandria; and, in a Christian
 market, the sanctity of the workmen might enhance the
 intrinsic value of the work.

 Their riches. 
 But the necessity of manual labour was insensibly
 superseded. The novice was tempted to bestow his fortune on
 the saints in whose society he was resolved to spend the
 remainder of his life; and the pernicious indulgence of the
 laws permitted him to receive, for their use, any future
 accessions of legacy or inheritance. (53) Mezanla contributed 
 her plate, three hundred pounds' weight of silver, and Paula
 contracted an immense debt for the relief of their favourite
 monks, who kindly imparted the merits of their prayers and
 penance to a rich and liberal sinner. (54) Time continually 
 increased, and accidents could seldom diminish, the estates
 of the popular monasteries, which spread over the adjacent
 country and cities: and, in the first century of their
 institution, the infidel Zosimus has maliciously observed,
 that, for the benefit of the poor, the Christian monks had
 reduced a great part of mankind to a state of beggary. (55) As 
 long as they maintained their original fervour, they
 approved themselves, however, the faithful and benevolent
 stewards of the charity which was intrusted to their care.
 But their discipline was corrupted by prosperity: they
 gradually assumed the pride of wealth, and at last indulged
 the luxury of expense. Their public luxury might be excused
 by the magnificence of religious worship, and the decent
 motive of erecting durable habitations for an immortal
 society. But every age of the church has accused the
 licentiousness of the degenerate monks; who no longer
 remembered the object of their institution, embraced the
 vain and sensual pleasures of the world which they had
 renounced, (56) and scandalously abused the riches which had 
 been acquired by the austere virtues of their founders. (57) 
 Their natural descent, from such painful and dangerous
 virtue, to the common vices of humanity, will not, perhaps,
 excite much grief or indignation in the mind of a
 philosopher.

 Their solitude. 
 The lives of the primitive monks were consumed in penance
 and solitude, undisturbed by the various occupations which
 fill the time, and exercise the faculties, of reasonable,
 active, and social beings. Whenever they were permitted to
 step beyond the precincts of the monastery, two jealous
 companions were the mutual guards and spies of each other's
 actions; and, after their return, they were condemned to
 forget, or, at least, to suppress, whatever they had seen or
 heard in the world. Strangers, who professed the orthodox
 faith, were hospitably entertained in a separate apartment;
 but their dangerous conversation was restricted to some
 chosen elders of approved discretion and fidelity. Except in
 their presence, the monastic slave might not receive the
 visits of his friends or kindred; and it was deemed highly
 meritorious, if he afflicted a tender sister, or an aged
 parent, by the obstinate refusal of a word or look. (58) The 
 monks themselves passed their lives, without personal
 attachments, among a crowd which had been formed by
 accident, and was detained, in the same prison, by force or
 prejudice. Recluse fanatics have few ideas or sentiments to
 communicate: a special licence of the abbot regulated the
 time and duration of their familiar visits; and, at their
 silent meals, they were enveloped in their cowls,
 inaccessible, and almost invisible, to each other. (59) Study 
 is the resource of solitude; but education had not prepared
 and qualified for any liberal studies the mechanics and
 peasants who filled the monastic communities. They might
 work; but the vanity of spiritual perfection was tempted to
 disdain the exercise of manual labour; and the industry must
 be faint and languid which is not excited by the sense of
 personal interest.

 Their devotion and visions. 
 According to their faith and zeal, they might employ the
 day, which they passed in their cells, either in vocal or
 mental prayer: they assembled in the evening, and they were
 awakened in the night, for the public worship of the
 monastery. The precise moment was determined by the stars,
 which are seldom clouded in the serene sky of Egypt; and a
 rustic horn, or trumpet, the signal of devotion, twice
 interrupted the vast silence of the desert. (60) Even sleep, 
 the last refuge of the unhappy, was rigorously measured: the
 vacant hours of the monk heavily rolled along, without
 business or pleasure; and, before the close of each day, he
 had repeatedly accused the tedious progress of the sun. (61) 
 In this comfortless state, superstition still pursued and
 tormented her wretched votaries. (62) The repose which they 
 had sought in the cloister was disturbed by tardy
 repentance, profane doubts, and guilty desires; and, while
 they considered each natural impulse as an unpardonable sin,
 they perpetually trembled on the edge of a flaming and
 bottomless abyss. From the painful struggles of disease and
 despair, these unhappy victims were sometimes relieved by
 madness or death; and, in the sixth century, a hospital was
 founded at Jerusalem for a small portion of the austere
 penitents who were deprived of their senses. (63) Their 
 visions, before they attained this extreme and acknowledged
 term of frenzy, have afforded ample materials of
 supernatural history. It was their firm persuasion that the
 air which they breathed was peopled with invisible enemies;
 with innumerable demons, who watched every occasion, and
 assumed every form, to terrify, and above all to tempt,
 their unguarded virtue. The imagination, and even the
 senses, were deceived by the illusions of distempered
 fanaticism; and the hermit, whose midnight prayer was
 oppressed by involuntary slumber, might easily confound the
 phantoms of horror or delight which had occupied his
 sleeping and his waking dreams. (64)
 The Caenobites and Anachorets. 
 The monks were divided into two classes: the Coenobites, who
 lived under a common and regular discipline, and the
 Anachorets, who indulged their unsocial, independent
 fanaticism. (65) The most devout, or the most ambitious, of 
 the spiritual brethren renounced the convent, as they had
 renounced the world. The fervent monasteries of Egypt,
 Palestine, and Syria were surrounded by a Laura, (66) a 
 distant circle of solitary cells; and the extravagant
 penance of the Hermits was stimulated by applause and
 emulation. (67) They sunk under the painful weight of crosses 
 and chains; and their emaciated limbs were confined by
 collars, bracelets, gauntlets and greaves of massy and rigid
 iron. All superfluous incumbrance of dress they
 contemptuously cast away; and some savage saints of both
 sexes have been admired, whose naked bodies were only
 covered by their long hair. They aspired to reduce
 themselves to the rude and miserable state in which the
 human brute is scarcely distinguished above his kindred
 animals; and the numerous sect of Anachorets derived their
 name from their humble practice of grazing in the fields of
 Mesopotamia with the common herd. (68) They often usurped the den of some wild beast whom they affected to resemble; they
 buried themselves in some gloomy cavern, which art or nature
 had scooped out of the rock; and the marble quarries of
 Thebais are still inscribed with the monuments of their
 penance. (69) The most perfect Hermits are supposed to have 
 passed many days without food, many nights without sleep,
 and many years without speaking; and glorious was the man (I
 abuse that name) who contrived any cell, or seat, of a
 peculiar construction, which might expose him, in the most
 inconvenient posture, to the inclemency of the seasons.

 Simeon Stylites, A.D. 395-451. 
 Among these heroes of the monastic life, the name and genius
 of Simeon Stylites (70) have been immortalised by the singular 
 invention of an aerial penance. At the age of thirteen the
 young Syrian deserted the profession of a shepherd, and
 threw himself into an austere monastery. After a long and
 painful novitiate, in which Simeon was repeatedly saved from
 pious suicide, he established his residence on a mountain,
 about thirty or forty miles to the east of Antioch. Within
 the space of a mandra, or circle of stones to which he had
 attached himself by a ponderous chain, he ascended a column,
 which was successively raised from the height of nine, to
 that of sixty, feet from the ground. (71) In this last and 
 lofty station, the Syrian Anachoret resisted the heat of
 thirty summers, and the cold of as many winters. Habit and
 exercise instructed him to maintain his dangerous situation
 with out fear or giddiness, and successively to assume the
 different postures of devotion. He sometimes prayed in an
 erect attitude, with his outstretched arms in the figure of
 a cross; but his most familiar practice was that of bending
 his meagre skeleton from the forehead to the feet; and a
 curious spectator, after numbering twelve hundred and
 forty-four repetitions, at length desisted from the endless
 account. The progress of an ulcer in his thigh (72) might 
 shorten, but it could not disturb, this celestial life; and
 the patient Hermit expired without descending from his
 column. A prince, who should capriciously inflict such
 tortures, would be deemed a tyrant; but it would surpass the
 power of a tyrant to impose a long and miserable existence
 on the reluctant victims of his cruelty. This voluntary
 martyrdom must have gradually destroyed the sensibility both
 of the mind and body; nor can it be presumed that the
 fanatics who torment themselves are susceptible of any
 lively affection for the rest of mankind. A cruel, unfeeling
 temper has distinguished the monks of every age and country:
 their stern indifference, which is seldom mollified by
 personal friendship, is inflamed by religious hatred; and
 their merciless zeal has strenuously administered the holy
 office of the Inquisition.

 Miracles and worship of the monks. 
 The monastic saints, who excite only the contempt and pity
 of a philosopher, were respected and almost adored by the
 prince and people. Successive crowds of pilgrims from Gaul
 and India saluted the divine pillar of Simeon; the tribes of
 Saracens disputed in arms the honour of his benediction, the
 queens of Arabia and Persia gratefully confessed his
 supernatural virtue; and the angelic Hermit was consulted by
 the younger Theodosius in the most important concerns of the
 church and state. His remains were transported from the
 mountain of Telenissa, by a solemn procession of the
 patriarch, the master-general of the East, six bishops,
 twenty-one counts or tribunes, and six thousand soldiers;
 and Antioch revered his bones as her glorious ornament and
 impregnable defence. The fame of the apostles and martyrs
 was gradually eclipsed by these recent and popular
 Anachorets; the Christian world fell prostrate before their
 shrines; and the miracles ascribed to their relics exceeded,
 at least in number and duration, the spiritual exploits on
 their lives. But the golden legend of their lives (73) was 
 embellished by the artful credulity of their interested
 brethren; and a believing age was easily persuaded that the
 slightest caprice of an Egyptian or a Syrian monk had been
 sufficient to interrupt the eternal laws of the universe.
 The favourites of Heaven were accustomed to cure inveterate
 diseases with a touch, a word, or a distant message; and to
 expel the most obstinate demons from the souls or bodies
 which they possessed. They familiarly accosted, or
 imperiously commanded, the lions and serpents of the desert;
 infused vegetation into a sapless trunk; suspended iron on
 the surface of the water; passed the Nile on the back of a
 crocodile; and refreshed themselves in a fiery furnace.
 These extravagant tales, which display the fiction, without
 the genius, of poetry, have seriously affected the reason,
 the faith, and the morals of the Christians. Superstition of the age. Their credulity debased and vitiated the faculties of the mind: they
 corrupted the evidence of history; and superstition
 gradually extinguished the hostile light of philosophy and
 science. Every mode of religious worship which had been
 practised by the saints, every mysterious doctrine which
 they believed, was fortified by the sanction of divine
 revelation, and all the manly virtues were oppressed by the
 servile and pusillanimous reign of the monks. If it be
 possible to measure the interval between the philosophic
 writings of Cicero and the sacred legend of Theodoret,
 between the character of Cato and that of Simeon, we may
 appreciate the memorable revolution which was accomplished
 in the Roman empire within a period of five hundred years.

 II. CONVERSION OF THE BARBARIANS. 
The progress of Christianity has been marked by two
 glorious and decisive victories: over the learned and
 luxurious citizens of the Roman empire; and over the warlike
 barbarians of Scythia and Germany, who subverted the empire
 and embraced the religion of the Romans. The Goths were the
 foremost of these savage proselytes; and the nation was
 indebted for its conversion to a countryman, or at least to
 a subject, worthy to be ranked among the inventors of useful
 arts who have deserved the remembrance and gratitude of
 posterity. A great number of Roman provincials had been led
 away into captivity by the Gothic bands who ravaged Asia in
 the time of Gallienus; and of these captives many were
 Christians, and several belonged to the ecclesiastical
 order. Those involuntary missionaries, dispersed as slaves
 in the villages of Dacia, successively laboured for the
 salvation of their masters. The seeds which they planted of
 the evangelic doctrine were gradually propagated; and before
 the end of a century the pious work was achieved by the
 labours of Ulphilas, whose ancestors had been transported
 beyond the Danube from a small town of Cappadocia.

 Ulphilas, apostle of the Goths, A.D. 360 etc.
Ulphilas, the bishop and apostle of the Goths, (74) acquired 
 their love and reverence by his blameless life and
 indefatigable zeal, and they received with implicit
 confidence the doctrines of truth and virtue which he
 preached and practised. He executed the arduous task of
 translating the Scriptures into their native tongue, a
 dialect of the German or Teutonic language; but he prudently
 suppressed the four books of Kings, as they might tend to
 irritate the fierce and sanguinary spirit of the barbarians.
 The rude, imperfect idiom of soldiers and shepherds, so ill
 qualified to communicate any spiritual ideas, was improved
 and modulated by his genius; and Ulphilas, before he could
 frame his version, was obliged to compose a new alphabet of
 twenty-four letters; four of which he invented to express
 the peculiar sounds that were unknown to the Greek and Latin
 pronunciation. (75) But the prosperous state of the Gothic 
 church was soon afflicted by war and intestine discord, and
 the chieftains were divided by religion as well as by
 interest. Fritigern, the friend of the Romans, became the
 proselyte of Ulphilas; while the haughty soul of Athanaric
 disdained the yoke of the empire and of the Gospel. The
 faith of the new converts was tried by the persecution which
 he excited. A waggon, bearing aloft the shapeless image of
 Thor, perhaps, or of Woden, was conducted in solemn
 procession through the streets of the camp, and the rebels
 who refused to worship the god of their fathers were
 immediately burnt with their tents and families. The
 character of Ulphilas recommended him to the esteem of the
 Eastern court, where he twice appeared as the minister of
 peace, he pleaded the cause of the distressed Goths, who
 implored the protection of Valens; and the name of 'Moses'
 was applied to this spiritual guide, who conducted his
 people through the deep waters of the Danube to the Land of
 Promise. (76) The devout shepherds, who were attached to his 
 person and tractable to his voice, acquiesced in their
 settlement at the foot of the Maesian mountains, in a
 country of woodlands and pastures, which supported their
 flocks, and herds, and enabled them to purchase the corn and
 wine of the more plentiful provinces. These harmless
 barbarians multiplied in obscure peace and the profession of
 Christianity. (77)
 The Goths, Vandals, Burgundians, etc, embrace Christianity, A.D. 400, etc. 
 Their fiercer brethren, the formidable Visigoths,
 universally adopted the religion of the Romans, with whom
 they maintained a perpetual intercourse of war, of
 friendship, or of conquest. In their long and victorious
 march from the Danube to the Atlantic Ocean they converted
 their allies; they educated the rising generation; and the
 devotion which reigned in the camp of Alaric, or the court
 of Toulouse might edify or disgrace the palaces of Rome and
 Constantinople. (78) During the same period Christianity was 
 embraced by almost all the barbarians who established their
 kingdoms on the ruins of the Western empire; the Burgundians
 in Gaul, the Suevi in Spain, the Vandals in Africa, the
 Ostrogoths in Pannonia, and the various bands of mercenaries
 that raised Odoacer to the throne of Italy. The Franks and
 the Saxons still persevered in the errors of Paganism, but
 the Franks obtained the monarchy of Gaul by their submission
 to the example of Clovis; and the Saxon conquerors of
 Britain were reclaimed from their savage superstition by the
 missionaries of Rome. These barbarian proselytes displayed
 an ardent and successful zeal in the propagation of the
 faith. The Merovingian kings and their successors,
 Charlemagne and the Othos, extended by their laws and
 victories the dominion of the cross. England produced the
 apostle of Germany; and the evangelic light was gradually
 diffused from the neighbourhood of the Rhine to the nations
 of the Elbe, the Vistula, and the Baltic. (79)
 Motives of their faith. 
 The different motives which influenced the reason or the
 passions of the barbarian converts cannot easily be
 ascertained. They were often capricious and accidental; a
 dream, an omen, the report of a miracle, the example of some
 priest or hero, the charms of a believing wife, and, above
 all, the fortunate event of a prayer or vow which, in a
 moment of danger, they had addressed to the God of the
 Christians. (80) The early prejudices of education were 
 insensibly erased by the habits of frequent and familiar
 society; the moral precepts of the Gospel were protected by
 the extravagant virtues of the monks; and a spiritual
 theology was supported by the visible power of relics, and
 the pomp of religious worship. But the rational and
 ingenious mode of persuasion which a Saxon bishop (81) 
 suggested to a popular saint might sometimes be employed by
 the missionaries who laboured for the conversion of
 infidels.  This metaphysical reasoning, too refined perhaps for the barbarians of Germany, was fortified by the grosser weight of authority and popular consent. The advantage of temporal prosperity had deserted the Pagan cause and passed over to the service of Christianity. The Romans themselves, the most powerful and enlightened nation of the globe, had renounced their ancient superstition; and if the ruin of their empire seemed to accuse the efficacy of the new faith, the disgrace was already retrieved by the conversion of the victorious Goths. The valiant and fortunate barbarians who subdued the provinces of the West successively received and reflected the same edifying example. Before the age of Charlemagne, the Christian nations of Europe might exult in the exclusive possession of the temperate climates, of the fertile lands which produced corn, wine, and oil; while the savage idolaters and their helpless idols were confined to the extremities of the earth, the dark and frozen regions of the North. (82)
 Effects of their conversion. 
 Christianity, which opened the gates of Heaven to the
 barbarians, introduced an important change in their moral
 and political condition. They received, at the same time,
 the use of letters, so essential to a religion whose
 doctrines are contained in a sacred book, and while they
 studied the divine truth, their minds were insensibly
 enlarged by the distant view of history, of nature, of the
 arts, and of society. The version of the Sciptures into
 their native tongue which had facilitated their conversion,
 must excite, among their clergy, some curiosity to read he
 original text, to understand the sacred liturgy of the
 church, and to examine, in the writings of the fathers, the
 chain of ecclesiastical tradition. These spiritual gifts
 were preserved in the Greek and Latin languages, which
 concealed the inestimable monuments of ancient learning. The
 immortal productions of Virgil, Cicero, and Livy, which were
 accessible to the Christian barbarians, maintained a silent
 intercourse between the reign of Augustus and the times of
 Clovis and Charlemagne. The emulation of mankind was
 encouraged by the remembrance of a more perfect state; and
 the flame of science was secretly kept alive, to warm and
 enlighten the mature age of the Western world. In the most
 corrupt state of Christianity the barbarians might learn
 justice from the law, and mercy from the gospel; and if the
 knowledge of their duty was insufficient to guide their
 actions or to regulate their passions, they were sometimes
 restrained by conscience, and frequently punished by
 remorse. But the direct authority of religion was less
 effectual than the holy communion, which united them with
 their Christian brethren in spiritual friendship. The
 influence of these sentiments contributed to secure their
 fidelity in the service or the alliance of the Romans, to
 alleviate the horrors of war, to moderate the insolence of
 conquest, and to preserve, in the downfall of the empire, a
 permanent respect for the name and institutions of Rome. In
 the days of Paganism the priests of Gaul and Germany reigned
 over the people, and controlled the jurisdiction of the
 magistrates; and the zealous proselytes transferred an
 equal, or more ample, measure of devout obedience to the
 pontiffs of the Christian faith. The sacred character of the
 bishops was supported by their temporal possessions; they
 obtained an honourable seat in the legislative assemblies of
 soldiers and freemen; and it was their interest, as well as
 their duty, to mollify by peaceful counsels the fierce
 spirit of the barbarians. The perpetual correspondence of
 the Latin clergy, the frequent pilgrimages to Rome and
 Jerusalem, and the growing authority of the popes, cemented
 the union of the Christian republic, and gradually produced
 the similar manners and common jurisprudence which have
 distinguished from the rest of mankind the independent, and
 even hostile, nations of modern Europe.

 They are involved in the Arian heresy. 
 But the operation of these causes was checked and retarded
 by the unfortunate accident which infused a deadly poison
 into the cup of salvation. Whatever might be the early
 sentiments of Ulphilas, his connections with the empire and
 the church were formed during the reign of Arianism. The
 apostle of the Goths subscribed the creed of Rimini;
 professed with freedom, and perhaps with sincerity, that the
 Son was not equal or consubstantial to the FATHER,(83) 
 communicated these errors to the clergy and people; and
 infected the barbaric world with an heresy (84) which the 
 great Theodosius proscribed and extinguished among the
 Romans. The temper and understanding of the new proselytes
 were not adapted to metaphysical subtleties; but they
 strenuously maintained what they had piously received as the
 pure and genuine doctrines of Christianity. The advantage of
 preaching and expounding the Scriptures in the Teutonic
 language promoted the apostolic labours of Ulphilas and his
 successors; and they ordained a competent number of bishops
 and presbyters for the instruction of the kindred tribes.
 The Ostrogoths, the Burgundians, the Suevi, and the Vandals,
 who had listened to the eloquence of the Latin clergy, (85) 
 preferred the more intelligible lessons of their domestic
 teachers; and Arianism was adopted as the national faith of
 the warlike converts who were seated on the ruins of the
 Western empire. This irreconcilable difference of religion
 was a perpetual source of jealousy and hatred; and the
 reproach of Barbarian was embittered by the more odious
 epithet of Heretic. The heroes of the North, who had
 submitted with some reluctance to believe that all their
 ancestors were in hell, (86) were astonished and exasperated 
 to learn that they themselves had only changed the mode of
 their eternal condemnation. Instead of the smooth applause
 which Christian kings are accustomed to expect, from their
 loyal prelates, the orthodox bishops and their clergy were
 in a state of opposition to the Arian courts; and their
 indiscreet opposition frequently became criminal, and might
 sometimes be dangerous. (87) The pulpit, that safe and sacred 
 organ of sedition, resounded with the names of Pharaoh and
 Holofernes; (88) the public discontent was inflamed by the 
 hope or promise of a glorious deliverance; and the seditious
 saints were tempted to promote the accomplishment of their
 own predictions. General toleration. Notwithstanding these provocations, the
 Catholics of Gaul, Spain, and Italy enjoyed, under the reign
 of the Arians, the free and peaceful exercise of their
 religion. Their haughty masters respected the zeal of a
 numerous people, resolved to die at the foot of their
 altars, and the example of their devout constancy was
 admired and imitated by the barbarians themselves. The
 conquerors evaded, however, the disgraceful reproach, or
 confession, of fear, by attributing their toleration to the
 liberal motives of reason and humanity; and while they
 affected the language, they imperceptibly imbibed the
 spirit, of genuine Christianity.

 Arian persecution of the Vandals. 
 The peace of the church was sometimes interrupted. The
 catholics were indiscreet, the barbarians were impatient;
 and the partial acts of severity or injustice, which had
 been recommended by the Arian clergy, were exaggerated by
 the orthodox writers. The guilt of persecution may be
 imputed to Euric, king of the Visigoths who suspended the
 exercise of ecclesiastical, or, at least, of episcopal
 functions, and punished the popular bishops of Aquitain with
 imprisonment, exile, and confiscation. (89) But the cruel and 
 absurd enterprise of subduing the minds of a whole people
 was undertaken by the Vandals alone. Genseric, A.D. 429-477. Genseric himself, in his early youth, had renounced the orthodox communion; and the apostate could neither grant nor expect a sincere forgiveness. He was exasperated to find that the Africans, who had fled before him in the field, still presumed to dispute his will in synods and churches; and his ferocious mind was incapable of fear or of compassion. His catholic subjects were oppressed by intolerant laws and arbitrary punishments. The language of Genseric was furious and formidable; the knowledge of his intentions might justify the most unfavourable interpretation of his actions; and the Arians were reproached with the frequent executions which stained the palace and the dominions of the tyrant. Arms and ambition were, however, the ruling passions of the monarch of the sea. Hunneric, A.D. 477. But Hunneric, his inglorious son, who seemed to inherit only his vices, tormented the Catholics with the
 same unrelenting fury which had been fatal to his brother,
 his nephews, and the friends and favourites of his father;
 and even to the Arian patriarch, who was inhumanly burnt
 alive in the midst of Carthage. The religious war was
 preceded and prepared by an insidious truce; persecution was
 made the serious and important business of the Vandal court;
 and the loathsome disease which hastened the death of
 Hunneric revenged the injuries, without contributing to the
 deliverance, of the church. The throne of Africa was
 successively filled by the two nephews of Hunneric;Gundamund, A.D. 484. by
 Gundamund, who reigned about twelve, and by Thrasimund, who
 governed the nation above twenty-seven, years. Their
 administration was hostile and oppressive to the orthodox
 party. Gundamund appeared to emulate, or even to surpass,
 the cruelty of his uncle; and if at length he relented, if
 he recalled the bishops, and restored the freedom of
 Athanasian worship, a premature death intercepted the
 benefits of his tardy clemency.Thrasimund, A.D. 496. His brother, Thrasimund, was
 the greatest and most accomplished of the Vandal kings, whom
 he excelled in beauty, prudence, and magnanimity of soul.
 But this magnanimous character was degraded by his
 intolerant zeal and deceitful clemency. Instead of threats
 and tortures, he employed the gentle, but efficacious,
 powers of seduction. Wealth, dignity, and the royal favour
 were the liberal rewards of apostacy; the catholics who had
 violated the laws might purchase their pardon by the renunciation of their faith; and whenever Thrasimund mediated any rigorous measure, he patiently waited till the indiscretion of his adversaries furnished him with a specious opportunity. Bigotry was his last sentiment in the hour of death; and he exacted from his successor a solemn oath that he would never tolerate the sectaries of Athanasius. Hilderic, A.D. 523. But his successor, Hilderic, the gentle son of the savage Hunneric, preferred the duties of humanity and justice to the vain obligation of an impious oath; and his accession was gloriously marked by the restoration of peace
 and universal freedom. Gelimer, A.D. 530. The throne of that virtuous, though feeble, monarch was usurped by his cousin Gelimer, a zealous Arian: but the Vandal kingdom, before he could enjoy or
 abuse his power, was subverted by the arms of Belisarius; and the orthodox party retaliated the injuries which they had endured. (90)
 A general view of the persecution in Africa. 
The passionate declamations of the catholics, the sole
 historians of this persecution, cannot afford any distinct
 series of causes and events, any impartial view of
 characters or counsels; but the most remarkable
 circumstances that deserve either credit or notice may be
 referred to the following heads:   I. In the original law which is still extant, (91) Hunneric expressly declares, and the declaration appears to be correct, that he had faithfully transcribed the regulations and penalties of the Imperial edicts against the heretical congregations, the clergy, and the people, who dissented from the established religion. If the rights of conscience had been understood, the catholics must have condemned their past conduct, or acquiesced in their actual sufferings. But they still persisted to refuse the indulgence which they claimed. While they trembled under the lash of persecution, they praised the laudable severity of Hunneric himself, who burnt or banished great numbers of Manicheans; (92) and they rejected with horror the ignominious compromise that the disciples of Arius and of Athanasius should enjoy a reciprocal and similar toleration in the territories of the Romans and in those of the Vandals.(93)  II. The practice of a conference, which the Catholics had so frequently used to insult and punish their obstinate antagonists, was retorted against themselves. (94) At the command of Hunneric, four hundred and sixty-six orthodox bishops assembled at Carthage; but when they were admitted into the hall of audience, they had the mortification of beholding the Arian Cyrila, exalted on the patriarchal throne. The disputants were separated, after the mutual and ordinary reproaches of noise and silence, of delay and precipitation, of military force and of popular clamour. One martyr and one confessor were selected among the catholic bishops; twenty-eight escaped by flight, and eighty-eight by conformity; forty-six were sent into Corsica to cut timber for the royal navy; and three hundred and two were banished to the different parts of Africa, exposed to the insults of their enemies, and carefully deprived of all the temporal and spiritual comforts of life. (95) The hardships of ten years' exile must have reduced their numbers; and if they had complied with the law of Thrasimund, which prohibited any episcopal consecrations, the orthodox church of Africa must have expired with the lives of its actual members. They disobeyed; and their disobedience was punished by a second exile of two hundred and twenty bishops into Sardinia, where they languished fifteen years, till the accession of the gracious Hilderic. (96) The two islands were judiciously chosen by the malice of their Arian tyrants. Seneca, from his own experience, has deplored and exaggerated the miserable state of Corsica, (97) and the plenty of Sardinia was overbalanced by the unwholesome quality of the air.(98) III. The zeal of Genseric and his successors for the conversion of the Catholics must have rendered them still more jealous to guard the purity of the Vandal faith. Before the churches were finally shut, it was a crime to appear in a barbarian dress; and those who presumed to neglect the royal mandate were rudely dragged backwards by their long hair. (99) The palatine officers, who refused to profess the religion of their prince, were ignominiously stripped of their honours and employments; banished to Sardinia and Sicily; or condemned to the servile labours of slaves and peasants in the fields of Utica. In the districts which had been peculiarly allotted to the Vandals, the exercise of the catholic worship was more strictly prohibited; and severe penalties were denounced against the guilt both of the missionary and the proselyte. By these arts the faith of the barbarians was preserved, and their zeal was inflamed: they discharged with devout fury the office of spies, informers, or executioners and whenever their cavalry took the field, it was the favourite amusement of the march to defile the churches and to insult the clergy of the adverse faction.(100)  IV. The citizens who had been educated in the luxury of the Roman province were delivered, with exquisite cruelty, to the Moors of the desert. A venerable train of bishops, presbyters, and deacons, with a faithful crowd of four thousand and ninety-six persons, whose guilt is not precisely ascertained, were torn from their native homes by the command of Hunneric. During the night they were confined, like a herd of cattle, amidst their own ordure: during the day they pursued their march over the burning sands; and if they fainted under the heat and fatigue, they were goaded or dragged along till they expired in the hands of their tormentors. (101) These unhappy exiles, when they reached the Moorish huts, might excite the compassion of a people whose native humanity was neither improved by reason nor corrupted by fanaticism: but if they escaped the dangers, they were condemned to share the distress, of a savage life.   V. It is incumbent on the authors of persecution previously to reflect whether they are determined to support it in the last extreme. They excite the flame which they strive to extinguish; and it soon becomes necessary to chastise the contumacy, as well as the crime, of the offender. The fine, which he is unable or unwilling to discharge, exposes his person to the severity of the law; and his contempt of lighter penalties suggests the use and propriety of capital punishment. Through the veil of fiction and declamation we may clearly perceive that the Catholics, more especially under the reign of Hunneric, endured the most cruel and ignominious treatment. (102) Respectable citizens, noble matrons, and consecrated virgins were stripped naked and raised in the air by pulleys, with a weight suspended at their feet. In this painful attitude their naked bodies were torn with scourges, or burnt in the most tender parts with red-hot plates of iron. The amputation of the ears, the nose, the tongue, and the right hand was inflicted by the Arians; and although the precise number cannot be defined, it is evident that many persons, among whom a bishop, (103) and a roconsul, (104) may be named, were entitled to the crown of martyrdom. The same honour has been ascribed to the memory of Count Sebastian, who professed the Nicene creed with unshaken constancy; and Genseric might detest as an heretic the brave and ambitious fugitive whom he dreaded as a rival.(105)  VI. A new mode of conversion, which might subdue the feeble and alarm the timorous, was employed by the Arian ministers. They imposed, by fraud or violence, the rites of baptism and punished the apostasy of the Catholics, if they disclaimed this odious and profane ceremony, which scandalously violated the freedom of the will and the unity of the sacrament. (106) The hostile sects had formerly allowed the validity of each other's baptism; and the innovation, so fiercely maintained by the Vandals, can be imputed only to the example and advice of the Donatists.  VII. The Arian clergy surpassed in religious cruelty the king and his Vandals but they were incapable of cultivating the spiritual vineyard which they were so desirous to possess. A patriarch (107) might seat himself on the throne of Carthage; some bishops, in the principal cities, might usurp the place of their rivals; but the smallness of their numbers, and their ignorance of the Latin language, (108) disqualified the barbarians for the ecclesiastical ministry of a great church; and the Africans, after the loss of their orthodox pastors, were deprived of the public exercise of Christianity.   VIII. The emperors were the natural protectors of the Homoousian doctrine; and the faithful people of Africa, both as Romans, and as Catholics, preferred their lawful sovereignty to the usurpation of the barbarous heretics. During an interval of peace and friendship Homeric restored the cathedral of Carthage, at the intercession of Zeno, who reigned in the East, and of Placidia, the daughter and relict of emperors and the sister of the queen of the Vandals. (109) But this decent regard was of short duration; and the haughty tyrant displayed his contempt for the religion of the empire by studiously arranging the bloody images of persecution in all the principal streets through which the Roman ambassador must pass in his way to the palace. (110) An oath was required from the bishops who were assembled at Carthage, that they would support the succession of his son Hilderic, and that they would renounce all foreign or transmarine correspondence. This engagement, consistent, as it should seem, with their moral and religious duties, was refused by the more
sagacious members (111) of the assembly. Their refusal, faintly coloured by the pretence that it is unlawful for a Christian to swear, must provoke the suspicions of a jealous tyrant.

 Catholic frauds.
 The catholics, oppressed by royal and military force, were
 far superior to their adversaries in numbers and learning
 With the same weapons which the Greek (112) and Latin fathers 
 had already provided for the Arian controversy, they
 repeatedly silenced or vanquished the fierce and illiterate
 successors of Ulphilas. The consciousness of their own
 superiority might have raised them above the arts and
 passions of religious warfare. Yet, instead of assuming such
 honourable pride, the orthodox theologians were tempted, by
 the assurance of impunity, to compose fictions which must be
 stigmatised with the epithets of fraud and forgery. They
 ascribed their own polemical works to the most venerable
 names of Christian antiquity; the characters of Athanasius
 and Augustin were awkwardly personated by Vigilius and his
 disciples; (113) and the famous creed, which so clearly 
 expounds the mysteries of the Trinity and the Incarnation,
 is deduced, with strong probability, from this African
 school. (114) Even the Scriptures themselves were profaned by 
 their rash and sacrilegious hands. The memorable text which
 asserts the unity of the THREE who bear witness in heaven
 (115) is condemned by the universal silence of the orthodox 
 fathers, ancient versions, and authentic manuscripts. (116) It 
 was first alleged by the catholic bishops whom Hunneric
 summoned to the conference of Carthage. (117) An allegorical 
 interpretation, in the form perhaps of a marginal note,
 invaded the text of the Latin Bibles which were renewed and
 corrected in a dark period of ten centuries. (118) After the 
 invention of printing, (119) the editors of the Greek 
 Testament yielded to their own prejudices, or those of the
 times; (120) and the pious fraud, which was embraced with 
 equal zeal at Rome and at Geneva, has been infinitely
 multiplied in every country and every language of modern
 Europe.

 and miracles. 
The example of fraud must excite suspicion: and the specious
 miracles by which the African catholics have defended the
 truth and justice of their cause may described, with more
 reason, to their own industry than to the visible protection
 of Heaven. Yet the historian who views his religious
 conflict with an impartial eye may condescend to mention one
 preternatural event, which will edify the devout and
 surprise the incredulous. Tipasa, (121) a maritime colony of 
 Mauritania, sixteen miles to the east of Caearea, had been
 distinguished in every age by the orthodox zeal of its
 inhabitants. They had braved the fury of the Donatists; (122) 
 they resisted or eluded the tyranny of the Arians. The town
 was deserted on the approach of an heretical bishop; most of
 the inhabitants who could procure ships passed over to the
 coast of Spain; and the unhappy remnant, refusing all
 communion with the usurper, still presumed to hold their
 pious, but illegal, assemblies. Their disobedience
 exasperated the cruelty of Hunneric. A military count was
 despatched from Carthage to Tipasa: he collected the
 catholics in the Forum, and, in the presence of the whole
 province, deprived the guilty of their right hands and their
 tongues. But the holy confessors continued to speak without
 tongues; and this miracle is attested by Victor, an African
 bishop, who published an history of the persecution within
 two years after the event. (123) At Constantinople we are astonished to find a cool, a learned, and unexceptionable witness, without interest, and without passion. Aeneas of Gaza, a Platonic philosopher, has accurately described his own observations on these African sufferers.  The testimony of Aeneas of Gaza might be confirmed by the superfluous evidence of the emperor Justinian, in a perpetual edict; of Count Marcellinus, in his Chronicle of the times; and of pope Gregory the First, who had resided at Constantinople as the minister of the Roman pontiff. (125) They all lived within the compass of a century; and they all appeal to their personal knowledge or the public notoriety for the truth of a miracle which was repeated in several instances, displayed on the greatest theatre of the world, and submitted during a series of years to the calm examination of the senses. This supernatural gift of the African confessors, who spoke without tongues, will command the assent of those, and of those only, who already believe that their language was pure and orthodox. But the stubborn mind of an infidel is guarded by secret, incurable suspicion; and the Arian, or Socinian, who has seriously rejected the doctrine of the Trinity, will not be shaken by the most plausible evidence of an Athanasian miracle.

 The ruin of Arianism among the Barbarians, A.D. 500-700. 
 The Vandals and the Ostrogoths persevered in the profession
 of Arianism till the final ruin of the kingdoms which they
 had founded in Africa and Italy. The barbarians of Gaul
 submitted to the orthodox dominion of the Franks and Spain
 was restored to the catholic church by the voluntary
 conversion of the Visigoths.

 Revolt and martyrdom of Hermenegild.in Spain, A.D. 577-584 
 This salutary revolution (126) was hastened by the example of 
 a royal martyr, whom our calmer reason may style an
 ungrateful rebel. Leovigild, the Gothic monarch of Spain,
 deserved the respect of his enemies and the love of his
 subjects: the catholics enjoyed a free toleration, and his
 Arian synods attempted, without much success, to reconcile
 their scruples by abolishing the unpopular rite of a second
 baptism. His eldest son Hermenegild, who was invested by his
 father with the royal diadem and the fair principality of
 Baetica, contracted an honourable and orthodox alliance with
 a Merovingian princess, the daughter of Sigebert, king of
 Austrasia, and of the famous Brunechild. The beauteous
 Ingundis, who was no more than thirteen years of age, was
 received, beloved, and persecuted in the Arian court of
 Toledo; and her religious constancy was alternately
 assaulted with blandishments and violence by Goisvintha, the
 Gothic queen, who abused the double claim of maternal
 authority. (127) Incensed by her resistance, Goisvintha seized 
 the catholic princess by her long hair, inhumanly dashed her
 against the ground, kicked her till she was covered with
 blood, and at last gave orders that she should be stripped
 and thrown into a basin or fish-pond. (128) Love and honour 
 might excite Hermenegild to resent this injurious treatment
 of his bride; and he was gradually persuaded that Ingundis
 suffered for the cause of divine truth. Her tender
 complaints, and the weighty arguments of Leander, archbishop
 of Seville, accomplished his conversion; and the heir of the
 Gothic monarchy was initiated in the Nicene faith by the
 solemn rites of confirmation. (129) The rash youth, inflamed 
 by zeal, and perhaps by ambition, was tempted to violate the
 duties of a son and a subject; and the catholics of Spain,
 although they could not complain of persecution, applauded
 his pious rebellion against an heretical father. The civil
 war was protracted by the long and obstinate sieges of
 Merida, Cordova, and Seville, which had strenuously espoused
 the party of Hermenegild. He invited the orthodox
 barbarians, the Suevi, and the Franks, to the destruction of
 his native land: he solicited the dangerous aid of the
 Romans, who possessed Africa and a part of the Spanish
 coast; and his holy ambassador, the archbishop Leander,
 effectually negotiated in person with the Byzantine court.
 But the hopes of the catholics were crushed by the active
 diligence of a monarch who commanded the troops and
 treasures of Spain; and the guilty Hermenegild after his
 vain attempts to resist or to escape, was compelled to
 surrender himself into the hands of an incensed father.
 Leovigild was still mindful of that sacred character; and
 the rebel, despoiled of the regal ornaments, was still
 permitted, in a decent exile, to profess the catholic
 religion. His repeated and unsuccessful treasons at length
 provoked the indignation of the Gothic king; and the
 sentence of death, which he pronounced with apparent
 reluctance, was privately executed in the tower of Seville.
 The inflexible constancy with which he refused to accept the
 Arian communion, as the price of his safety, may excuse the
 honours that have been paid to the memory of St.
 Hermenegild. His wife and infant son were detained by the
 Romans in ignominious captivity; and this domestic
 misfortune tarnished the glories of Leovigild, and
 embittered the last moments of his life.

 Conversion of Recared and the Visigoths of Spain, A.D. 586-589. 
 His son and successor, Recared, the first catholic king of
 Spain, had imbibed the faith of his unfortunate brother,
 which he supported with more prudence and success. Instead
 of revolting against his father, Recared patiently expected
 the hour of his death. Instead of condemning his memory, he
 piously supposed that the dying monarch had abjured the
 errors of Arianism, and recommended to his son the
 conversion of the Gothic nation. To accomplish that salutary
 end, Recared convened an assembly of the Arian clergy and
 nobles, declared himself a catholic, and exhorted them to
 imitate the example of their prince. The laborious
 interpretation of doubtful texts, or the curious pursuit of
 metaphysical arguments, would have excited an endless
 controversy; and the monarch discreetly proposed to his
 illiterate audience two substantial and visible arguments -
 the testimony of Earth and of Heaven. The Earth had
 submitted to the Nicene synod: the Romans, the barbarians,
 and the inhabitants of Spain unanimously professed the same
 orthodox creed; and the Visigoths resisted, almost alone,
 the consent of the Christian world. A superstitious age was
 prepared to reverence, as the testimony of Heaven, the
 preternatural cures which were performed by the skill or
 virtue of the catholic clergy; the baptismal fonts of Osset
 in Baetica (130) which were spontaneously replenished each 
 year on the vigil of Easter; (131) and the miraculous shrine 
 of St. Martin of Tours, which had already converted the
 Suevic prince and people of Gallicia. (132) The catholic king 
 encountered some difficulties on this important change of
 the national religion. A conspiracy, secretly fomented by
 the queen-dowager. was formed against his life; and two
 counts excited a dangerous revolt in the Narbonnese Gaul.
 But Recared disarmed the conspirators, defeated the rebels,
 and executed severe justice, which the Arians, in their
 turn, might brand with the reproach of persecution. Eight
 bishops, whose names betray their barbaric origin, abjured
 their errors; and all the books of Arian theology were
 reduced to ashes, with the house in which they had been
 purposely collected. The whole body of the Visigoths and
 Suevi, were allured or driven into the pale of the catholic
 communion; the faith, at least of the rising generation, was
 fervent and sincere; and the devout liberality of the
 barbarians enriched the churches and monasteries of Spain.
 Seventy bishops, assembled in the council of Toledo,
 received the submission of their conquerors; and the zeal of
 the Spaniards improved the Nicene creed, by declaring the
 procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, as well as from
 the Father; a weighty point of doctrine, which produced,
 long afterwards, the schism of the Greek and Latin churches.
 (133) The royal proselyte immediately saluted and consulted 
 pope Gregory, surnamed the Great, a learned and holy prelate
 whose reign was distinguished by the conversion of heretics
 and infidels. The ambassadors of Recared respectfully
 offered on the threshold of the Vatican his rich presents of
 gold and gems; they accepted, as a lucrative exchange, the
 hairs of St. John the Baptist; a cross which enclosed a
 small piece of the true wood; and a key that contained some
 particles of iron which had been scraped from the chains of
 St. Peter. (134)
 Conversion of the Lombards of Italy, A.D. 600 etc. 
 The same Gregory, the spiritual conqueror of Britain,
 encouraged the pious Theodelinda, queen of the Lombards, to
 propagate the Nicene faith among the victorious savages,
 whose recent Christianity was polluted by the Arian heresy.
 Her devout labours still left room for the industry and
 success of future missionaries, and many cities of Italy
 were still disputed by hostile bishops. But the cause of
 Arianism was gradually suppressed by the weight of truth, of
 interest, and of example; and the controversy, which Egypt
 had derived from the Platonic school, was terminated, after
 a war of three hundred years, by the final conversion of the
 Lombards of Italy. (135)
 Persecution of the Jews in Spain, A.D. 612-712.. 
 The first missionaries who preached the Gospel to the
 barbarians appealed to the evidence of reason, and claimed
 the benefit of toleration. (136) But no sooner had they 
 established their spiritual dominion than they exhorted the
 Christian kings to extirpate, without mercy, the remains of
 Roman or barbaric superstition. The successors of Clovis
 inflicted one hundred lashes on the peasants who refused to
 destroy their idols; the crime of sacrificing to the demons
 was punished by the Anglo-Saxon laws with the heavier
 penalties of imprisonment and confiscation; and even the
 wise Alfred adopted, as an indispensable duty, the extreme
 rigour of the Mosaic institutions. (137) But the punishment 
 and the crime were gradually abolished among a Christian
 people; the theological disputes of the schools were
 suspended by propitious ignorance; and the intolerant spirit
 which could find neither idolaters nor heretics, was reduced
 to the persecution of the Jews. That exiled nation had
 founded some synagogues in the cities of Gaul; but Spain,
 since the time of Hadrian, was filled with their numerous
 colonies. (138) The wealth which they accumulated by trade and 
 the management of the finances invited the pious avarice of
 their masters; and they might be oppressed without danger,
 as they had lost the use, and even the remembrance, of arms.
 Sisebut, a Gothic king who reigned in the beginning of the
 seventh century, proceeded at once to the last extremes of
 persecution. (139) Ninety thousand Jews were compelled to 
 receive the sacrament of baptism; the fortunes of the
 obstinate infidels were confiscated, their bodies were
 tortured, and it seems doubtful whether they were permitted
 to abandon their native country. The excessive zeal of the
 catholic king was moderated even by the clergy of Spain, who
 solemnly pronounced an inconsistent sentence: that the
 sacraments should not be forcibly imposed; but that the Jews
 who had been baptised should be constrained, for the honour
 of the church, to persevere in the external practice of a
 religion which they disbelieved and detested. Their frequent
 relapses provoked one of the successors of Sisebut to banish
 the whole nation from his dominions; and a council of Toledo
 published a decree that every Gothic king should swear to
 maintain this salutary edict. But the tyrants were unwilling
 to dismiss the victims whom they delighted to torture, or to
 deprive themselves of the industrious slaves over whom they
 might exercise a lucrative oppression. The Jews still
 continued in Spain, under the weight of the civil and
 ecclesiastical laws, which in the same country have been
 faithfully transcribed in the Code of the Inquisition The
 Gothic kings and bishops at length discovered that injuries
 will produce hatred, and that hatred will find the
 opportunity of revenge. A nation, the secret or professed
 enemies of Christianity, still multiplied in servitude and
 distress; and the intrigues of the Jews promoted the rapid
 success of the Arabian conquerors. (140)
Conclusion. 
 As soon as the barbarians withdrew their powerful support,
 the unpopular heresy of Arius sunk into contempt and
 oblivion. But the Greeks still retained their subtle and
 loquacious disposition: the establishment of an obscure
 doctrine suggested new questions and new disputes; and it
 was always in the power of an ambitious prelate or a fanatic
 monk to violate the peace of the church, and perhaps of the
 empire. The historian of the empire may overlook those
 disputes which were confined to the obscurity of schools and
 synods. The Manichceans, who laboured to reconcile the
 religions of Christ and of Zoroaster, had secretly
 introduced themselves into the provinces: but these foreign
 sectaries were involved in the common disgrace of the
 Gnostics, and the Imperial laws were executed by the public
 hatred. The rational opinions of the Pelagians were
 propagated from Britain to Rome, Africa, and Palestine, and
 silently expired in a superstitious age. But the East was
 distracted by the Nestorian and Eutychian controversies,
 which attempted to explain the mystery of the incarnation,
 and hastened the ruin of Christianity in her native land.
 These controversies were first agitated under the reign of
 the younger Theodosius: but their important consequences
 extend far beyond the limits of the present volume. The
 metaphysical chain of argument, the contests of
 ecclesiastical ambition, and their political influence on
 the decline of the Byzantine empire, may afford an
 interesting and instructive series of history, from the
 general councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon to the conquest of
 the East by the successors of Mahomet.


« NEXT »
« Fall In The WEST »
« Fall In The EAST »
« Decline & Fall » 

 Conclusion. 
 As soon as the barbarians withdrew their powerful support,
 the unpopular heresy of Arius sunk into contempt and
 oblivion. But the Greeks still retained their subtle and
 loquacious disposition: the establishment of an obscure
 doctrine suggested new questions and new disputes; and it
 was always in the power of an ambitious prelate or a fanatic
 monk to violate the peace of the church, and perhaps of the
 empire. The historian of the empire may overlook those
 disputes which were confined to the obscurity of schools and
 synods. The Manichceans, who laboured to reconcile the
 religions of Christ and of Zoroaster, had secretly
 introduced themselves into the provinces: but these foreign
 sectaries were involved in the common disgrace of the
 Gnostics, and the Imperial laws were executed by the public
 hatred. The rational opinions of the Pelagians were
 propagated from Britain to Rome, Africa, and Palestine, and
 silently expired in a superstitious age. But the East was
 distracted by the Nestorian and Eutychian controversies,
 which attempted to explain the mystery of the incarnation,
 and hastened the ruin of Christianity in her native land.
 These controversies were first agitated under the reign of
 the younger Theodosius: but their important consequences
 extend far beyond the limits of the present volume. The
 metaphysical chain of argument, the contests of
 ecclesiastical ambition, and their political influence on
 the decline of the Byzantine empire, may afford an
 interesting and instructive series of history, from the
 general councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon to the conquest of
 the East by the successors of Mahomet.